---
Pr-id: Communities at a Crossroads
P-id: TOD
A-id: 28
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# FOREWORD TO 2018 EDITION

This book was written between 2006 and 2009 as part of my Ph.D.
promotion. As often with similar cases, at that time the reasons for not
publishing it outnumbered the motives to follow up. First, by the time
this book was finalized, the 2008 financial crisis was ravaging Europe,
and odds of engaging in a research job in social sciences and humanities
were infinitesimal. Some of the research centers with which I
collaborated in conducting this research were discontinued in the same
weeks in which I was laying down the conclusions. In such a scenario,
this book was more likely to mark the end point of my research career --
as that of many others, rather than its beginning. Even when publishers
started to approach me, I preferred not to indulge in what at that
moment appeared as pointless vanity.

Second, at that time I was probably not fully aware of the importance of
keeping a memory of the present. Being myself involved in some digital
communitarian initiatives, conducting research was a way to reflect upon
our collective grassroots practices in a moment in which they were
mimicked by commercial services run by multinational corporations. The
attempt to figure out in what ways our practices and infrastructures
were different from the emerging services prevailed over the thrust to
historicize.

Last but definitely not least, as a young researcher, I was caught in
the modesty of the witness. As Haraway has recalled, in order for
modesty to be visible, the modest witness must be invisible.[^01foreword_1] It took
me some years, several readings, and many meaningful relationships to
realize that modesty and invisibility are a luxury that women cannot
afford. I wish to thank Joy Clancy, Stefania Milan, Nelly Oudshoorn,
Lissa Roberts -- and more recently Evelyn Ruppert, Anita Say Chan, Lucy
Suchman, and Sally Wyatt -- for having nurtured this awareness. I am
also deeply grateful to Geert Lovink and Miriam Rasch at the *Institute
of Networked Cultures* in Amsterdam for having expressed their
enthusiasm in making this work visible.

So, why have I made up my mind and decide to publish this book almost
ten years after its first release for academic purposes? A few factors
led me to overcome my reticence. First, in January 2017 I read a *Wired*
article titled 'How Silicon Valley Utopianism Brought You the Dystopian
Trump Presidency'.[^01foreword_2] The main argument of this article that Donald
Trump came to power by cleverly harnessing cyberculture's libertarian
myths and social media, was embarrassing. *Wired* was indeed admitting
that populism has been boosted by social media and underpinned by
libertarian credos. The source of embarassement was that *Wired* was
writing it. One could say that nowadays no one can avoid being populist,
for the reason that cultural traits introduced by libertarian
cyberculture are not recognized anymore in their historically situated
genesis. They have become universal and *Wired* has had a major role in
such universalization. Only an archaeology can return
anarco-individualism, suspicion of institutions, and techno-localism to
their historical context, and thus trim their universalistic reach. To
some extent, this book constitutes an archaeology. A double archaeology.
I will soon return to this point.

Second, the Cambridge Analytica scandal is only starting to reveal the
subtle mechanisms of manipulation allowed by social media platforms. For
those who participated in the early 2000s critical internet studies
wave, these revelations can hardly come as a surprise. Very early social
media abdicated to their communitarian, peer origins, and reproduced the
intermediated broadcasting model. It is thus worthwhile to recall -- as
this book does in its first part -- the genesis of the Web 2.0 ideology
in a period in which internet cultures were confused by the Dotcom burst
and new business models were lagging behind.

This point brings me to the third reason for publishing this book now.
The book is thought for those who have not lived the early days of the
Web 2.0 hype, a cohort that has now reached the age of higher education.
These are primarily Generation Z students and those who are interested
in how the internet looked like before *Facebook* and *YouTube*. My
students at a technical university in Northern Europe, for example, know
about the mailing list culture of the 1990s. They also know about art
and communitarian experiments in the same period. However, they know
less about how utopian roots turned into ideologies that eventually
brought on the commercialization of the internet, its geographical
closure, and its securization. While the goal of this book is not
nostalgic, it suggests that things could have been otherwise.

In 2018, a book written between 2006 and 2009 can be read under the lens
of a double archaeology. On one hand, the 2009 edition encompassed
hegemonic and minoritiarian early digital experiences. From the
here-and-now of 2009, it looked back to the genesis of network cultures
in the 1980s and 1990s. In the second part, it compared those early
discourses and practices to current communitarian developments. On the
other hand, this 2018 edition adds a second level of historicization.
From the 2018-now, it looks back ten years, before Snowden, when
Lawrence Lessig was committed to foster the Creative Commons, and when a
book such as Goldsmith and Wu's *Who Controls the Internet* could cause
a stir[^01foreword_3]. That was a time when peer-to-peer networks still challenged
centralization attempts by big players. Many of those networks are
analysed in this book. Some of them have ceased to exist for various
reasons, some others are still active today.

This double temporality allows diving into digital communalism at
different depths. The reader could approach it from the present tense
indicating the 2009 now, and follow communitarian accounts as they
unfold. Alternatively, she can retain a 2018 point of view and trace
back current developments to that period of profound internet
transformations. On a close look, these two attitudes may be
respectively compared to Silver's descriptive and analytical stage of
internet studies.[^01foreword_4] It is in order to keep this double archaeological
lens that the manuscript has not undergone major modifications in its
2018 edition. Most changes have been stylistic and linguistic. A
methodological chapter has been shrunk and integrated in the
introduction for readability's sake. Data and cases are those from the
original 2009 manuscript. When a note was added in 2018 in the light of
major developments, this is clearly marked.

*Communities at a Crossroads* returns a multi-faceted picture of
internet sociability between the two centuries. Almost one thousand
digital communities are analysed here through their own words and
rationales, as well as by focusing on the degrees of access and
participation that their software architectures allowed. What emerges is
a composite landscape made of non-profit and commercial, grassroots and
institutional, deterministic, and open efforts to articulate the tension
between technology and society. Above all, this rather encompassing
study of digital sociability shows that in the 2000s stabilization and
innovation dynamics materialized in similar ways in textual and software
artefacts. Today, one could say that this study anticipated the
'material turn' in Technology Studies, without renouncing to textual
components.

Annalisa Pelizza

Amsterdam/Sydney, August 2018

[^01foreword_1]: D. Haraway, *Modest\_witness\@Second\_Millenium.
    FemaleMan\_meets\_ Onco\_Mouseâ„¢: Feminism and technoscience*, New
    York: Routledge, 1997.

[^01foreword_2]: J. Tanz, 'How Silicon Valley Utopianism Brought You the Dystopian
    Trump Presidency', *Wired*, 20 January 2017,
    https://www.wired.com/2017/01/silicon-valley-utopianism-brought-dystopian-trump-presidency/?mbid=nl\_12217\_p3&CNDID=.

[^01foreword_3]: J. Goldsmith and T. Wu, *Who Controls the Internet?: Illusions of
    a Borderless World*, New York: Oxford University Press, 2006.

[^01foreword_4]: D. Silver, 'Looking Backwards, Looking Forwards: Cyberculture
    Studies, 1990-2000', in D. Gaunlett (ed.) *Web Studies*, London:
    Arnold Publishers, 2000.
