---
Pr-id: Communities at a Crossroads
P-id: TOD
A-id: 28
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# 7. FROM DEFINITIONS TO MAPS[^10chapter07_1] 

## 7.1 Limits of Criteria to Make Sense of Techno-social Assemblages

Cases analyzed so far show considerable differences as far as their
goals, source of boundaries, and theories of action are concerned. The
features indicated by early sociological literature to identify online
communities are not any more helpful.[^10chapter07_2] Not all projects, for example,
are non-profit initiatives: Akshaya, dotSUB, and Open Clothes are
business-oriented projects. Furthermore, many of the projects analysed
do not limit themselves to online interaction, but rely also on
face-to-face interaction. While the Free Software Foundation and the
Electronic Frontier Foundation carry on their activities mainly online,
Tonga.Online -- smart X tension, The World Starts With Me, and Proyecto
Cyberela -- Radio Telecentros blend offline interaction with online
learning activities. Likewise, as to the focus of interest,[^10chapter07_3] while
some of the cases analysed (i.e., Open Clothes, dotSUB, The World Starts
With Me) address a well-defined issue, in other cases the focus of
interest cannot be easily profiled. Telestreet, for example, aims to
create the conditions for grassroots universal access to media-making,
and Overmundo aims to provide Brazilian culture at large with tools for
self-expression. Concerning the type of technology used, while some
communities are enabled by peer-to-peer software (e.g., Telestreet and
the Free Software Foundation),[^10chapter07_4] projects like Overmundo and The World
Starts With Me use centralized platforms.

How can we make sense of this heterogeneity? This evidence questions the
criteria used to identify online assemblages as 'communities' (Table 14)
and eventually suggests abandoning the attempt to single out any
ecumenical definition of 'digital communites'.

                                           Profit/Non-profit   Only online/Also offline interaction   Specific focus of interest   Centralized/decentralized technology[^10chapter07_5]
  ---------------------------------------- ------------------- -------------------------------------- ---------------------------- ------------------------------------------
  Tonga.Online *--* smart X tension        Non-profit          Also offline                           No                           Centralized
  Akshaya                                  Profit              Also offline                           No                           Centralized
  Projecto Cyberela -- Radio Telecentros   Non-profit          Also offline                           Yes                          Centralized
  The World Starts With Me                 Non-profit          Also offline                           Yes                          Centralized
  canal\*ACCESSIBLE                        Non-profit          Mainly online                          No                           Centralized
  Electronic Frontier Foundation           Non-profit          Mainly online                          Yes                          Centralized
  Free Software Foundation                 Non-profit          Mainly online                          Yes                          Decentralized
  Telestreet                               Non-profit          Also offline                           No                           Decentralized
  Overmundo                                Non-profit          Mainly online                          No                           Centralized
  Open Clothes                             Profit              Mainly online                          Yes                          Centralized
  dotSUB                                   Profit              Mainly online                          Yes                          Centralized

Table 14 -- Classification of winning projects according to orientation
to business, relationship between online and offline interaction, focus
of interest, centralized/distributed technology used. No correlation
emerges among these variables

It is by now evident that communitarian relationships cannot be
conceived in ontological terms, looking for an ideal 'essence' of online
sociability. Rather, a more profitable direction of analysis proceeds by
replacing identification practices with mapping practices, an
essentialist approach with a relational one. Instead of looking for what
online assemblages *are*, we should try to map their *diversity*.

## 7.2 First Criterion: Open Accounts

As for any mapping exercise, criteria are necessary to map the diversity
of online assemblages. However, which criteria might be suitable ones?
Those identified by sociological literature are not helpful, as they are
ambiguous. They phenomenologically register a state of the world,
without considering how that state has crystallized. For instance, the
online/offline criterion does not take into consideration the
face-to-face interactions taking place among developing teams. With
*Overmundo*, face-to-face interactions have been fundamental for the
establishment of the community. Likewise, the profit/non-profit nature
is not easily distinguishable. Non-profit projects like *Proyecto
Cyberela -- Radio Telecentros* and *Overmundo* depend upon multinational
corporations for their sustainability, and provide them returns in terms
of image, while for-profit initiatives like *dotSUB* can only rely on
their users. Also the degree of specificity of the focus of interest is
difficult to be set.

In chapter 6, a criterion has proved to be relevant in distinguishing
two types of communities based on their spokespersons' accounts. It was
related to the length of the chain of actions leading to the
materialization[^10chapter07_6] of the digital community. The criterion
distinguished between accounts in which the chain of action is short,
there are more intermediaries than mediators and the boundaries of the
community tend to be stable and taken for granted, and accounts in which
the chain of action is long, there are more mediators than
intermediaries and the boundaries of the community are not traceable
because of the ceaseless proliferation of mediators. *Open Clothes*, the
*Electronic Frontier Foundation, Akshaya, canal\*ACCESSIBLE*, *Proyecto
Cyberela -- Radio Telecentros* and are *dotSUB* classified in the first
category; *Tonga.Online -- smart X tension, The World Starts With Me,
the Free Software Foundation, Telestreet, Overmundo* fall in the second
category.

In the first category of accounts, information artefacts are conceived
of either as mere intermediaries that transport elements without
interfering with the output, or as goals to achieve. Paradoxically, to
those same technologies that are seen as causes of paradigmatic changes
no more interesting role is attributed than that of silently
transporting information that has been produced elsewhere. Projects that
conceive of ICT as intermediaries are also those where it is possible to
distinguish a sender that starts the process of communication and a
receiver to which that process is addressed. For instance, the
*Electronic Frontier Foundation* acts as an Addresser providing
information to a vast audience of people interested in digital freedoms.
In similar cases, the inside/outside dichotomy maintains its relevance:
even if they are layered into concentric levels of participation (from
simple members to the core team), group boundaries tend to be stable and
taken for granted.

Differently, in the second type of accounts, community is shown as
materializing from a concatenation of mediators, the chain of action is
well-deployed and each participant activates other participants. These
are projects where the digital community is 'what is made to act by a
large star-shaped web of mediators flowing in and out of it. It is made
to exist by its many ties.'[^10chapter07_7] Crucially, ties among heterogeneous
elements are not made of 'solidarity', 'harmony' or 'team spirit'. With
the *Free Software Foundation*, for instance, GNU OS, licenses, and the
Linux kernel are not assembled together by means of 'harmony'.[^10chapter07_8]
Rather, communality can be the a posteriori, transient recognition of
their 'cold' association.

In other words, these are the cases where community is accounted for as
an actor-network. As Michel Callon has pointed out,

the actor network is reducible neither to an actor alone nor to a
network. Like networks it is composed of a series of heterogeneous
elements, animate and inanimate, that have been linked to one another
for a certain period of time... But the actor network should not, on the
other hand, be confused with a network linking in some predictable
fashion elements that are perfectly well defined and stable, for the
entities it is composed of, whether natural or social, could at any
moment redefine their identity and mutual relationships in some new way
and bring new elements into the network.[^10chapter07_9]

This quotation explains why in this type of account the dichotomy
Addresser/Addressee loses relevance: the elements that the community is
composed of can at any moment redefine their mutual relationship and
boundaries have not been black-boxed.

The second type of account corresponds to a 'good text'. Indeed, texts
are not less objective than experiments or statistics. If a textual
account is part of what makes an assemblage exist, this does not mean
that it is just a 'fictional narrative'.[^10chapter07_10] Its accuracy, objectivity
and truthfulness can still be measured. As Latour has pointed out,

> textual accounts are the social scientist's laboratory and if
> laboratory practice is any guide, it's because of the artificial
> nature of the place that objectivity must be achieved on conditions
> that artifacts be detected by a continuous and obsessive attention.
> \[...\] If the social is something that circulates in a certain way
> \[...\], then it may be passed along by many devices adapted to the
> task -- including texts, reports, accounts, and tracers. It may or it
> may not. Textual accounts can fail like experiments often do'
> (Emphasis in the text).[^10chapter07_11]

Latour does not only argue for the objectivity of texts, but suggests a
criterion for assessing the quality and objectivity of textual accounts.
He defines a good account as 'one that *traces a network*, \[that is\] a
string of actions where each participant is treated as a full-blown
mediator', where the social is passed along.[^10chapter07_12] If we stick to this
criterion, the projects analysed in the previous chapter can be
distinguished between those which 'pass along the social' -- that is,
those that numbered more mediators than intermediaries, and those which
do not. This is a relevant distinction for our goal to map online
sociability -- as a sort of meta-principle measuring the objectivity and
accuracy of accounts that bring communities into existence, and thus we
propose to use it as a mapping criterion.

## 7.3 Second Criterion: Regimes of Access and Visibility

While applications as texts are performative accounts by which a
community and its spokespersons are brought into existence, the social
may be passed along by many, also not textual, devices. Textual accounts
of how information artefacts aggregate communities are one device
through which the social circulates. In the case of online sociability,
actual software plays a crucial role, along with texts. As Shirky's
understanding of social software as 'political science in executable
form' recalls, the social is embedded in specific patterns of
communication enabled by software.[^10chapter07_13] Software articulates the
possibilities and constraints whereby a techno-social assemblage is
gathered. How are digital communities brought into existence by actual
software?

One way to look at these possibilities and constraints is to consider
how they 'configure' different types of users.[^10chapter07_14] Akrich and Latour
introduced the notion of 'script' to indicate the instruction,
possibilities for action and behaviours suggested by artefacts, and
consequently the types of users implicitly 'inscribed\' or presupposed
by software.[^10chapter07_15] The standard car seat belt, for example, unfolds over
the abdomen and thus presupposes either male users, or non-pregnant
women. Actual users can then 'subscribe' to the script, and thus follow
the instructions, or not (i.e., they 'disinscribe').

In the case of software architectures, possibilities and constraints are
strictly dependable on regimes of access and visibility. Such regimes
make some functions accessible and visible to members only, others also
to non-members or to different degrees of membership. By focusing on
these regimes of access and visibility, I suggest that we can follow how
software articulates the processes whereby a digital assembly is
gathered and different actors are enacted.

Literature in the sociology of media and media theory sustains me in
this effort. Boyd and Ellison, for example, have argued that structural
variations around visibility and access constitute one of the primary
ways whereby social network sites (SNSs) differentiate themselves, and
constitute their own field of the political.[^10chapter07_16] The public display of
connections is a crucial component of SNSs: 'what makes social network
sites unique is not that they allow individuals to meet strangers, but
rather that they enable users to articulate and *make visible* their
social networks'.[^10chapter07_17] The visibility of users' profiles varies by site
and allows different procedures of inclusion/exclusion: profiles on
*Friendster* and *Tribe.net*, for example, used to be visible to anyone,
including non-subscribers. Conversely, *LinkedIn* filters what a viewer
may see based on whether she has a paid account or not; again
differently, *MySpace* allows users to choose whether they want their
profile to be public or restricted to friends only.

Masanès offers a similar example of articulation of the regimes of
access and visibility when referring to the '*fabrique* of the networked
environment'.[^10chapter07_18] He too argues that web platforms differentiate by the
potentiality to access a number of functions as non-members. For
instance, while the reading function is open in *Wikipedia* and
*Delicious*, it is closed in *Slashdot*. Differently, the submission
function is open in *Wikipedia*, but partially closed in *Delicious*
(since it requires to log in). Again, while the discussion function is
open in *Slashdot*, it is conversely closed in *Wikipedia*. That is,
Masanès adds to boyd and Ellison's insight a distinction among multiple
functions. Visibility is thus one function among others, to which access
can or cannot be granted to guests.

An attention to the regimes of visibility and access characterizes
Lovink and Rossiter's analysis of weblogs, as well.[^10chapter07_19] They argue that
the logic of the blog is that of the link. Links enhance visibility
through a ranking system and delimit the club of 'Friends',[^10chapter07_20] the
cultural enclave. Such a delimitation does not arise out of technical
scarcity: virtually there is no reason why one can not include all the
existing links. Rather, limits are motivated by affinity: the blogger
creates links to those other bloggers whose culture and taste she
shares. This is why blogs are said to be characterized by a politics of
enclosure: they are 'zones of affinity with their own protectionist
policies. If you're high-up in the blog scale of desirable association,
the political is articulated by the endless request for linkage. These
cannot all be met, however, and resentment if not enemies are
born'.[^10chapter07_21]

One of the consequences of this articulation is the fact that the
non-Friend, the Other, the Outside remains invisible: 'the fact that I
do NOT link to you remains invisible. The unanswered email is the most
significant one. So while the blog has some characteristics of the
network, it is not open, it cannot change, because it closes itself to
the potential for change and intervention'.[^10chapter07_22] Blog software rejects
the possibility of involving otherness.[^10chapter07_23]

This closure places blogs -- seen as a kind of social aggregate *and* as
a type of software allowing that aggregate -- on one hand of a continuum
whose other end is occupied by software which shows the potentiality to
involve new entities in the course of action. Similar software would
enable assemblages in which 'the entities \[they are\] composed of,
whether natural or social, could at any moment redefine their identity
and mutual relationships in some new way *and bring new elements into
the network*'.[^10chapter07_24]

What would such software look like? As textual accounts can or cannot
trace a network where new elements are triggered by mediators, in a
similar vein software can or cannot plan in its design the potentiality
for the Outside to have access and be visible. As in some textual
accounts the dichotomy Addresser/Addressee loses relevance and 'the
definition of the "outside" has been dissolved and replaced by the
circulation of plug-ins' so some software architectures can help to get
over the distinction between 'membership' vs. 'otherness', 'inside' vs.
'outside', while other architectures cannot.[^10chapter07_25] A similar software
architecture would establish the potentiality for the Outside, the
Guest, the Non-member to 'speak', 'be publicly heard' and leave a public
trace of the interaction. Examples are non-moderated forums and mailing
lists, to which everyone can subscribe online and post a message that
will be publicly readable. On the contrary, 'contact us' forms that
generate private flows of communication to the website manager do not
leave a publicly visible trace of the interaction, even if non-members
can submit a message. Yet between closed web forms and open forums there
are many intermediate positions and forms of actorial enactment. This
second mapping criterion should thus be seen as a continuous, non-binary
variable, rather than as a dichotomic distinction.

In order to operationalize this criterion, I navigated through the
projects' websites.[^10chapter07_26] In so doing, I took note of the functionalities
accessible online[^10chapter07_27] (see second column in Table 15). Among these, I
then sorted out those that allow users to interact with the community
and to leave visible traces of their interaction (third column in Table
15). To identify this subset of technologies, I myself acted like a
guest on the websites: I posted, commented, subscribed to mailing lists,
signed petitions, each time exploring the boundaries embedded into the
software architecture. Some websites allow only members to interact,
others allow also guests, still others allow guests to register online
and become members, either without asking for specific requirements or
by anchoring the registration to certified personal data (e.g.,
passport, ID card, health insurance number).

Each peculiar set of interactive tools can be seen as establishing
specific regimes of access and visibility. These regimes enact diverse
types of users (see column four in Table 15), and allow different
degrees of visibility of the contributions submitted by the
tester-researcher acting as a guest (see 'degree of visibility of the
Outside': fifth column in Table 15).

Despite being qualitative, this analysis is not less accountable. On one
hand, while being subjective, the experience of the researcher is
replicable by any other internet user. The researcher's website browsing
is comparable to that of an abstract 'Other': the visibility of the
contributions posted by the researcher is comparable to the visibility
that contributions by any other non-member could achieve. On the other
hand, the analysis of the degree of guest visibility allowed by each
regime cannot be quantitatively measured without denying the peculiar
regimes set by each project. While I tried to obtain a measurement from
the ratio of number of interactive technologies to overall number of
technologies used, such a value did not distinguish between the
different regimes of access for members and guests, nor did it account
for the diverse entrance barriers for guests to register as members. I
thus had to stick to descriptions, rather than using measurements.
Results are reported in Table 15.

+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
|             | Technologie | Interactive | Inscribed   | Degree of   |
|             | s           | technologie | users       | visibility  |
|             | used        | s           |             | of the      |
|             |             | that allow  |             | Outside     |
|             |             | users to    |             |             |
|             |             | leave       |             |             |
|             |             | publicly    |             |             |
|             |             | visible     |             |             |
|             |             | traces      |             |             |
+=============+=============+=============+=============+=============+
| Akshaya     | **Textual   | None        | 1. Passive, | Invisible,  |
|             | web pages** |             | invisible   | no online   |
| www.akshaya | (read       |             | guest       | registra-ti |
| .net        | only);      |             |             | on          |
|             | **Guestbook |             |             |             |
|             | form**      |             |             |             |
|             | (does not   |             |             |             |
|             | work);      |             |             |             |
|             | **'Contact  |             |             |             |
|             | us' link**: |             |             |             |
|             | list of     |             |             |             |
|             | phone       |             |             |             |
|             | numbers;    |             |             |             |
|             | **Restricte |             |             |             |
|             | d           |             |             |             |
|             | area**: it  |             |             |             |
|             | is not      |             |             |             |
|             | possible to |             |             |             |
|             | register    |             |             |             |
|             | online      |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Proyecto    | Textual web | None        | 1. Passive, | Invisible,  |
| Cyberela -- | pages (read |             | invisible   | no online   |
| Radio       | only);      |             | guest       | registra-ti |
| Telecentros | Video       |             |             | on          |
|             | streaming;  |             |             |             |
| www.cemina. |             |             |             |             |
| org.br      | PDF         |             |             |             |
|             | documents'  |             |             |             |
|             | publishing; |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | Radio       |             |             |             |
|             | streaming/d |             |             |             |
|             | ownload;    |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | Contact     |             |             |             |
|             | form        |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| The World   | **Flash     | Students    | 1. Members  | Invisible,  |
| Starts With | animations* | **forum**   | interacting | no online   |
| Me          | *           | accessible  | with each   | registra-ti |
|             | accessible  | only by     | other       | on          |
| www.theworl | only to     | registered  |             |             |
| dstarts.org | students    | students.   |             |             |
|             | and         | Online      |             |             |
|             | teachers;   | registratio |             |             |
|             |             | n           |             |             |
|             | Contact     | is not      |             |             |
|             | **e-mail**  | allowed     |             |             |
|             | addresses;  |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | Students    |             |             |             |
|             | **forum**   |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Tonga.Onlin | Textual web | **Discussio | 1. Members  | Invisible,  |
| e           | pages (read | n           | interacting | but low     |
| *--* smart  | only); News | forum**:    | with each   | barriers to |
| X tension   | feed;       | read-only   | other; 2.   | member-ship |
|             |             | for guests, | Passive,    |             |
| www.mulonga | Discussion  | submission- | invisible   |             |
| .net        | forum;      | open        | guest       |             |
|             |             | for         |             |             |
|             | Contact     | members.    |             |             |
|             | form;       | Online      |             |             |
|             |             | registratio |             |             |
|             | Newsletter; | n           |             |             |
|             |             | is allowed  |             |             |
|             | A/V         |             |             |             |
|             | streaming   |             |             |             |
|             | and         |             |             |             |
|             | download    |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| dotSUB      | Video       | Video       | 1. Members  | Invisible,  |
|             | **screening | **uploading | as experts; | but low     |
| dotsub.com  | **          | **          | 2. Passive, | barriers to |
|             | is open;    | and         | invisible   | member-ship |
|             |             | **subtitlin | guest       |             |
|             | To          | g**         |             |             |
|             | **upload**  | is          |             |             |
|             | one's own   | restricted  |             |             |
|             | videos and  | to members. |             |             |
|             | **subtitle* | But online  |             |             |
|             | *           | registratio |             |             |
|             | other       | n           |             |             |
|             | people's    | is allowed  |             |             |
|             | videos      |             |             |             |
|             | registratio |             |             |             |
|             | n           |             |             |             |
|             | is required |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Canal\*ACCE | Photo, map  | Open        | 1.          | Visible     |
| SSIBLE      | and video   | discussion  | Interactive |             |
|             | **database* | **forum**:  | visible     |             |
| www.zexe.ne | *           | it does not | guest       |             |
| t/barcelona | searchable  | need        |             |             |
|             | by date,    | registratio |             |             |
|             | name of     | n           |             |             |
|             | submitter,  |             |             |             |
|             | city area,  |             |             |             |
|             | type of     |             |             |             |
|             | obstacle;   |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | Open        |             |             |             |
|             | discussion  |             |             |             |
|             | **forum**   |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Electronic  | Contact     | EFF         | 1. Passive, | Invisible   |
| Frontier    | **e-mail**  | software    | invisible   |             |
| Foundation  | addresses.; | projects    | Other       |             |
|             |             | make use of |             |             |
| www.eff.org | Newsletter; | **wikis**   | 2. Engaged  |             |
|             |             | for         | citizens    |             |
|             | RSS Feeds;  | coordinatio |             |             |
|             |             | n,          | 3.          |             |
|             | 'Send a     | **mailing   | Developers  |             |
|             | postcard'   | lists** and |             |             |
|             | **form**;   | Sourceforge |             |             |
|             |             | 's          |             |             |
|             | 'Send your  | **tracker** |             |             |
|             | message to  | for         |             |             |
|             | decision    | development |             |             |
|             | makers'     |             |             |             |
|             | **form**:   |             |             |             |
|             | restricted  |             |             |             |
|             | to U.S.     |             |             |             |
|             | citizens;   |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | **HTML/PDF  |             |             |             |
|             | guides**    |             |             |             |
|             | for         |             |             |             |
|             | Internet    |             |             |             |
|             | users;      |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | 'Line       |             |             |             |
|             | Noise'      |             |             |             |
|             | **Podcast** |             |             |             |
|             | ;           |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | 'Submit     |             |             |             |
|             | prior Art'  |             |             |             |
|             | **form**;   |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | **EFF       |             |             |             |
|             | software    |             |             |             |
|             | projects**: |             |             |             |
|             | wikis,      |             |             |             |
|             | mailing     |             |             |             |
|             | lists and   |             |             |             |
|             | Sourceforge |             |             |             |
|             | 's          |             |             |             |
|             | tracker;    |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | 'Deeplinks' |             |             |             |
|             | **blog**:   |             |             |             |
|             | no comment  |             |             |             |
|             | facilities  |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Free        | Newsletter; | **Mailing   | 1. Passive, | Guest       |
| Software    |             | lists** on  | invisible   | develop-per |
| Foundation  | **News      | specific    | Other 2.    | s           |
|             | section**   | campaigns   | Engaged     | are visible |
| www.fsf.org | (read       | restricted  | citizens 3. |             |
|             | only);      | to members, | Guest       |             |
| www.gnu.org |             | but         | developers  |             |
|             | **Mailing   | registratio | 4. Member   |             |
|             | lists** on  | n           | develop-per |             |
|             | specific    | is allowed  | s           |             |
|             | campaigns;  | online;     |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | '**Contact  | **Mailing   |             |             |
|             | us**'       | lists** of  |             |             |
|             | e-mail      | code        |             |             |
|             | address;    | development |             |             |
|             |             | open also   |             |             |
|             | **Free      | to          |             |             |
|             | Software    | non-members |             |             |
|             | Directory** | ;           |             |             |
|             | (db on all  |             |             |             |
|             | existing    | **Free      |             |             |
|             | free sw):   | Software    |             |             |
|             | users can   | Directory** |             |             |
|             | download    | :           |             |             |
|             | and rate    | non-members |             |             |
|             | sw, submit  | can rate    |             |             |
|             | a level,    | sw,         |             |             |
|             | subscribe   | subscribe   |             |             |
|             | to          | to          |             |             |
|             | development | development |             |             |
|             | -focused    | -focused    |             |             |
|             | mailing     | mailing     |             |             |
|             | lists and   | lists and   |             |             |
|             | IRC         | IRC         |             |             |
|             | channels,   | channels;   |             |             |
|             | view VCS    |             |             |             |
|             | repository; | **FSF       |             |             |
|             |             | Groups      |             |             |
|             | **Campaigns | Wiki** open |             |             |
|             | center**:   | to guests   |             |             |
|             | information | too;        |             |             |
|             | on          |             |             |             |
|             | campaigns   | **Code      |             |             |
|             | and access  | contributio |             |             |
|             | to 'take    | n**:        |             |             |
|             | action'     | open to     |             |             |
|             | tools       | members,    |             |             |
|             | hosted by   | but online  |             |             |
|             | partner     | registratio |             |             |
|             | organizatio | n           |             |             |
|             | n           | is allowed  |             |             |
|             | like EFF's  | on Savannah |             |             |
|             | action      | servers     |             |             |
|             | alert;      |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | FSF Groups  |             |             |             |
|             | Wiki;       |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | **FSF       |             |             |             |
|             | Blogs**     |             |             |             |
|             | publishes   |             |             |             |
|             | blog        |             |             |             |
|             | entries by  |             |             |             |
|             | 'people in  |             |             |             |
|             | the         |             |             |             |
|             | community', |             |             |             |
|             | no comments |             |             |             |
|             | allowed,    |             |             |             |
|             | but it      |             |             |             |
|             | possible to |             |             |             |
|             | suggest     |             |             |             |
|             | one's own   |             |             |             |
|             | blog;       |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | **Events**  |             |             |             |
|             | section:    |             |             |             |
|             | RSS feed;   |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | **Code      |             |             |             |
|             | contributio |             |             |             |
|             | n**:        |             |             |             |
|             | open to     |             |             |             |
|             | members     |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Telestreet  | **News**    | Open        | 1.          | Visible     |
|             | section run | **comments* | Interactive |             |
| www.telestr | by          | *           | visible     |             |
| eet.it      | editorial   | on news;    | Other 2.    |             |
|             | team,       |             | Low         |             |
| www.ngvisio | guests'     | Open        | barriers    |             |
| n.org       | comments    | mailing     | member-ship |             |
|             | allowed;    | list;       |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | Open a      | Discussion  |             |             |
|             | posteriori  | **forum**   |             |             |
|             | moderated   | (need       |             |             |
|             | **mailing   | registratio |             |             |
|             | list**      | n           |             |             |
|             | (Telestreet | which is    |             |             |
|             | );          | allowed     |             |             |
|             |             | online);    |             |             |
|             | Closed      |             |             |             |
|             | **mailing   | **Peer-to-p |             |             |
|             | list**      | eer**       |             |             |
|             | (NGV);      | distributio |             |             |
|             |             | n           |             |             |
|             | Discussion  | and **ftp   |             |             |
|             | forum;      | upload**    |             |             |
|             |             | open to     |             |             |
|             | Video       | guests      |             |             |
|             | download;   |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | **Peer-to-p |             |             |             |
|             | eer**       |             |             |             |
|             | video       |             |             |             |
|             | distributio |             |             |             |
|             | n;          |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | **Ftp       |             |             |             |
|             | upload** of |             |             |             |
|             | videos      |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Overmundo   | **Blog**:   | **Blog**:   | 1.          | Invisible,  |
|             | open to     | only        | Invisible   | barriers to |
| www.overmun | read, only  | members can | Other       | member-ship |
| do.com.br   | members can | comment,    |             | posed by    |
|             | comment,    | propose,    | 2\. Entry   | time,       |
|             | submit,     | revise and  | members     | commit-ment |
|             | revise,     | vote        | 3.          | and ID      |
|             | vote        | articles to | Established |             |
|             | articles;   | be          | members     |             |
|             |             | published.  | 4. Senior   |             |
|             | **Contact   | Online      | members     |             |
|             | form** to   | registratio |             |             |
|             | contact the | n           |             |             |
|             | core team   | is allowed  |             |             |
|             |             | BUT         |             |             |
|             |             | requires    |             |             |
|             |             | sensitive   |             |             |
|             |             | data.       |             |             |
|             |             | Members     |             |             |
|             |             | have        |             |             |
|             |             | different   |             |             |
|             |             | voting      |             |             |
|             |             | weights     |             |             |
|             |             | according   |             |             |
|             |             | to the      |             |             |
|             |             | length of   |             |             |
|             |             | their       |             |             |
|             |             | participati |             |             |
|             |             | on          |             |             |
|             |             | in the      |             |             |
|             |             | community   |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Open        | Read-only   | **Bulletin  | 1./2./3./4D | Invisible,  |
| Clothes     | **news**    | board:**    | iverse      | barriers to |
|             | section;    | posting     | forms of    | member-ship |
| www.open-cl |             | requires    | member-ship | posed by    |
| othes.com   | Bulletin    | membership; |             | time,       |
|             | board;      |             |             | commit-ment |
|             |             | B2B and B2C |             | and ID      |
|             | 'Recipe'    | **selling   |             |             |
|             | **download* | platform:** |             |             |
|             | *;          | access      |             |             |
|             |             | requires    |             |             |
|             | **Database* | membership; |             |             |
|             | *           |             |             |             |
|             | on members  | Members     |             |             |
|             | ('Harbour') | **showcase* |             |             |
|             | ;           | *           |             |             |
|             |             | requires    |             |             |
|             | B2B and B2C | membership; |             |             |
|             | selling     |             |             |             |
|             | platform;   | **Newsmagaz |             |             |
|             |             | ine**       |             |             |
|             | Members     | open to     |             |             |
|             | **showcase* | contributio |             |             |
|             | *           | ns          |             |             |
|             | ('Dejima'); | by members  |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | Newsmagazin |             |             |             |
|             | e;          |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | **Database* |             |             |             |
|             | *           |             |             |             |
|             | of fashion  |             |             |             |
|             | schools;    |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | 'Production |             |             |             |
|             | journal'    |             |             |             |
|             | **showcase* |             |             |             |
|             | *           |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

Table 15 -- Analysis of the websites of the winning projects according
to the degree of visibility of the Outside

### 7.3.1 Configuring Users through Regimes of Access and Visibility

Results summarized in Table 15 identify various regimes of access and
visibility, which inscribe different types of users. In two of the
websites analysed, the possibility for either members or guests to
interact online is not provided by the software architecture.
*Akshaya*'s and *Proyecto Cyberela -- Radio Telecentros*' websites, in
fact, make use of broadcast technologies like textual web pages, video
and radio streaming or download, textual documents publishing. Even when
some kind of interactive toll is provided, either it does not work (the
guestbook in *Akshaya*), or its output remains invisible (the contact
form in *Proyecto Cyberela -- Radio Telecentros*). In these cases,
software inscribes an invisibile type of users -- be they guests or
members -- who are not supposed to interact, at least not publicly.

The case of *The World Starts With Me* is slightly different. Here too,
most technologies are one-to-many, but contents are restricted to
members. Registered members can interact on the students' discussion
forum. Since online registration is not allowed, non-members are not
foreseen. Here, software enacts only members, who are allowed minimal
interaction.

A similar regime is adopted by *Tonga.Online -- smart X tension* and
*dotSUB,* with the remarkable difference that here online registration
is allowed. *Tonga.Online* adopts some broadcast, non-interactive
technologies: *read-only web pages, news feed,* newsletter, audio-video
*streaming and download. In addition, the contact form allows a form of
interactivity, but it is not accessible from the website. The only
interactive tool that enables users to leave visible traces of their
passage is the discussion forum. As in the previous case, the forum is
accessible only to members. However, here online registration is allowed
and the process of registration requires ID and password.* In this case,
software inscribes an invisibile Other*,* but *the entrance barrier for
guests to register and become members is very low: they only need to
create an ID with password. *

As a decentralized video subtitling platform, *dotSUB* openly publishes
videos stored in its database. To upload and subtitle videos, online
registration is however required. Such registration allows identifying
members and enacts them as translation experts. It is thus noticeable
that registration only requires ID and password, and no skill test.

*Canal\*ACCESSIBLE* enacts a different regime of access and visibility.
It publishes a database of pictures, city maps and videos reporting
cases of *incivismo* at the expenses of disabled people. The database is
searchable by date, name of submitter, city area and type of obstacle.
In addition to the database, a discussion forum is open for comments:
posting does not need registration and posts are immediately visible on
the website. In this case, software allows visibility of contents
produced by both members and guests.

On the contrary, a politics of access that fosters a rather low degree
of visibility of the Outside is shown by the *Electronic Frontier
Foundation*'s website. The EFF follows communication strategies used by
pre-digital activists. The website is first and foremost a one-to-many
source of information and documentation: textual guides, a newsletter,
RSS feeds, podcasts and a blog (no comments allowed) contribute to the
construction of informed internet users, who nonetheless remain
invisible. Users are also asked to take action in favour of digital
liberties by spreading awareness to friends (e.g., through the 'Send a
postcard' form), by contributing to the EFF's knowledge (e.g., through
the 'Submit prior Art' form) and by lobbying decision makers (e.g.,
through the 'Send your message to decision makers' form, restricted to
U.S. citizens). Contacts between users and EFF core team can be
established only by means of e-mail addresses provided on the 'contact
us' page.

In this broadcasting communication model where an editorial staff
produces information that users will consume and propagate throughout,
only software development allows a visible interaction among
(registered) users and between users and the core team. The EFF software
projects subsection makes use of wikis in order to coordinate developers
and of mailing lists and *Sourceforge*'s tracker in order to
collaboratively develop software. In summary, in the EFF case software
enacts three types of users: passive readers, engaged (U.S.) citizens,
and developers.

The *Free Software Foundation* further develops this regime, with one
noticeable difference. Broadcast technologies like a newsletter, a
read-only newsreel, a blog (which does not allow comments) and RSS feeds
foster a traditional mass-media communication model. On top of that,
some interactive tools generate private, invisible flows of
communication, mainly through e-mail. Moreover, in the 'campaigns
center' section, 'take action' tools hosted by partner organization like
EFF allow members and guests to send appeals to decision makers.
Technologies allowing both members and guests to leave publicly visible
traces of their communication are implemented to support free software
development and distribution. Notably, the 'Free Software Directory' --
a database indexing all existing free software -- allows both members
and guests to download and rate software, submit a level, subscribe to
technical mailing lists and IRC channels, view the VCS repository.
Furthermore, a wiki aimed at facilitating the organization of regional
groups concerned on free software issues is open to guests too. Some
other mailing lists focused on specific campaigns are restricted to
members. Similarly, code contribution on the *Savannah* platform is open
to members only. However, online registration requires only ID and
password.

Summing up, in the FSF's website architecture, access to software
development and group organization facilities -- the core activities of
FSF -- is open also to non-members. The degree of visibility of the
Outside is thus rather high. In this case, software enacts four types of
users: passive supporters, engaged citizens, guest developers, and
member developers.

The *Telestreet*'s website is rather open to contributions by guest
users. In the news section, run by the editorial staff, anonymous
guests' comments are allowed. Subscription to the mailing list is open
and moderation is exerted only on outrageous posts. The discussion forum
requires only ID and password registration. Peer-to-peer video
distribution (supported by *NGVision* and using *Bit Torrent*) and ftp
video uploading are accessible to both members and guests. As such, two
types of users are inscribed in software: an interactive, visible Other
intended as video-maker, and members thanks to online, light
registration.A regime apart is implemented by *Overmundo*. The website
is made of a blog where video, music and texts are openly published,
while commenting on posts, writing articles, revising drafts and voting
functions are restricted to members.[^10chapter07_28] However, software articulates
different forms of membership. Members have different voting weights and
can access different functions according to the length of their
participation in the community. Commenting is open to all members, while
revision is restricted to senior members. It should also be noticed that
registration requires not only ID and password, but government ID or
passport copy for strangers.

All in all, *Overmundo* includes the Outside by transforming it.
Membership is not seen as a status, but as a process, and interactive
possibilities depend on length of commitment. Since they cannot access
any tool, non-members remain invisible, but they are provided with the
potentiality to integrate and be transformed into members. Guests are
admitted to undertake a process of accumulation of good reputation by
registering to the website, providing official data and proving to be
active contributors to the community. As a consequence, four types of
users are inscribed in software: the invisible Other, members (with
heavy registration) who can only comment and vote (although with low
weigths), members who can comment, vote (with higher weight) and write,
members who can comment, vote (with highest weight), write and revise.

Finally, *Open Clothes* follows a similar pattern of communication. The
website shows a vast array of participatory tools: from a bulletin board
to a selling platform, from members' showcase to a newsmagazine open to
contributions. However, these interactive features are restricted to
members, who are differently profiled according to their degree of
engagement. Like in *Overmundo*, light authentication is not sufficient
and registration requires personal data. In summary, in *Open Clothes*
software enacts several types of intended members corresponding to
different degrees of membership.

## 7.4 Mapping Online Sociability by Meta-Criteria

This last analysis shows how software can articulate the processes
whereby a digital assembly is gathered, and different actors are
enacted. As text does, software too contributes to upkeep communities
that would otherwise fade. This is a basic insight of this book. As a
consequence, any essentialist understanding of digital communities
becomes unattainable. However, one should not renounce to make sense of
techno-social assemblages that self-declare as 'digital communities' by
mapping them.

Two meta-criteria for a similar mapping exercise have been identified in
this chapter, indicating the degree of permeability of the distinction
between Addresser and Addressees, Members and Outside entailed by self
accounts (section 7.2) and software (section 7.3). Table 16 visualizes
the two criteria and maps communities accordingly.

+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Application | Invisible   | High        | Low         | Visible     |
| /Software   | Other       | barriers to | barriers to | Other       |
|             |             | membership  | membership  |             |
+=============+=============+=============+=============+=============+
| More        | The World   | Overmundo   | Tonga.Onlin | Free        |
| mediators   | Starts With |             | e-smart     | Software    |
| than        | Me          |             | X tension   | Foundation  |
| intermediar |             |             |             |             |
| ies         |             |             |             | Telestreet  |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| More        | Akshaya     | Open        | dotSUB      | Canal\*ACCE |
| intermediar |             | Clothes     |             | SSIBLE      |
| ies         | Proyecto    |             |             |             |
| than        | Cyberela-Ra |             |             |             |
| mediators   | dio         |             |             |             |
|             | Telecentros |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | Electronic  |             |             |             |
|             | Frontier    |             |             |             |
|             | Foundation  |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

Table 16 -- Map of communities according to degree of permeability
entailed by applications (rows) and software (columns)

The last cell in the first row includes cases where the number of
mediators in the textual account is higher than the number of
intermediaries and where guests' online contributions are visible. The
*Free Software Foundation* and *Telestreet* communities are accounted
for as concatenations of mediators made to exist by their many ties, and
their software architecture enables a high degree of visibility of the
Outside. In the *Free Software Foundation*'s application the boundaries
of the community blur to the point that it is difficult to distinguish
an outside and mediators emerge at the intersection of social and
technical concerns. Similarly, the *Telestreet* account deploys its ties
rather accurately. Although there are references to a cause-and-effect
relationship, in particular when media, taken as 'channels', are
depicted as intermediaries, yet disassembled or combined media are
conceived of as mediators. Furthermore, since every DIY-television
client is also a sender, the dichotomy Addresser/Addressee loses
relevance. On the other hand, *FSF*'s website leaves access to software
development and group organization facilities open to non-members, as
well. *Telestreet* allow guests to interact on their websites in
multiple ways, almost without control. In summary, in these cases both
textual application and software contribute to shape communities whose
boundaries are permeable enough to allow new actors to take part in the
course of action.

The other cells in the first row include cases where mediators are more
numerous than intermediaries, and software provides few or null
opportunities of access and visibility for non-members. *Tonga.Online --
smart X tension, Overmundo* and *The World Starts With Me* deploy a high
number of mediators and no or few intermediaries. In the *Tonga.Online
-- smart X tension*'s application, elements from both the ICT domain and
the cultural tradition of the Tonga people act as mediators that ferry
the geographical community across the Zambezi River, as well as across
the Information Age. In *The World Starts With Me*'s account, public
schools, clinics, NGOs, counselling services are assembled with
software, students, artists, peer facilitators, people from the slums in
blending formal institutions with informal ties. As to *Overmundo*, by
deploying many and variegated mediators, its application describes in
details all the actions that brought to the emergence of the digital
community.

On the other hand, their software architecture leaves few or null room
for guest contributions, albeit different degrees of permeability of the
inside Vs. outside distinction can be devised. *The World Starts With
Me* does not only impede any visibility to guests, but its contents are
restricted to members. Online registration is not allowed, and therefore
no possibility is foreseen for the Other to engage in a process of
admission, nor to interact with the community. Here, software shapes
community as a closed group whose boundaries are black-boxed. In this,
the textual application and software enact two different types of
community, and it might be expected that such difference reveals further
tensions in the development of the community.

Differently, the *Tonga.Online -- smart X tension*'s website allows
light registration requiring only online ID and password. Here, the
boundary between inside and outside is easily bypassable and does not
pose other requirements than creating an online identity. Higher
entrance requirements are posed by *Overmundo*. In this case, the
distinction is not simply between members and guests, but between
different degrees of membership. The *Overmundo* community is shaped on
an understanding of membership as a process of assimilation. Software
architecture admits non-members to undertake a process of accumulation
of good reputation by registering to the website, providing personal
data certified by administrative authorities and proving to be active
and long-term contributors.

The second row in Table 16 includes cases whose applications number more
intermediaries than mediators, the chain of action is short, identities
are stabilized, and the traditional mass-media distinction between
Addresser and Addressee maintains some relevance. In the second cell,
those projects whose software architecture does not provide visibility
to guests are included: *Akshaya, Proyecto Cyberela -- Radio
Telecentros* and the *Electronic Frontier Foundation*.

*Akshaya*'s application depicts a very short chain and a deterministic
theory of action, mentioning only one mediator (i.e., the e-literacy
programmes). Furthermore, its software shapes a closed community, closed
not only to external contributions, but also to its members. It indeed
resorts mainly to broadcast technologies and the only section likely to
allow some degree of interactivity is restricted to members with login
credentials acquired offline. Similarly, *Proyecto Cyberela -- Radio
Telecentros*'s application conceives of communication technologies as
intermediaries that transport women into the digital age. Its website
displays textual, video and radio information, without any tools
allowing some degree of interactivity, neither for members nor for
guests. The *EFF*'s application numbers informational resources and in
particular the 'action alert' system as the only mediator. In this
application, blog posts, podcasts, online videos, and the newsletter are
seen as intermediaries transporting information from a central editorial
staff to a wider audience. Its software regime of access and visibility
is similarly articulated. Mainly broadcast technologies are implemented:
the website is first of all a one-to-many source of information and
documentation. Some visibility of registered users' contributions is
allowed when it comes to software development: the 'EFF software
projects' subsection makes use of wikis in order to coordinate
developers and of mailing lists in order to collaboratively develop
software. All in all, in these three projects both text and software
contribute to shape black-boxed communities whose boundaries are
impermeable to the constitutive potential of the outside.

*Open Clothes* shows a consistent relationship between text and
software, as well. Here, the application does not mention the role of
artefacts as mediators, nor how the assemblage made of tailors, users,
contractors and clothes is made durable. Community is thus textually
shaped as a stabilized black box whose inner relationships are explained
in terms of cause-and-effect. At the same time, software articulates
different forms of membership, requiring personal data certified by
other authorities, and activite participation through desing sharing. In
other words, entrance barriers for guests are rather high.

Barriers are lower for *dotSUB*, which -- while recording a rather
deterministic textual application -- only requires online registration
for guests to acquire membership status. Lastly, *canal\*ACCESSIBLE* is
the only case whose account numbers more intermediaries than mediators,
and whose website affords a rather high degree of visibility of
non-members. On one hand, its application mentions broadcast media, a
political institution (the Municipality of Barcelona) and the internet
as mediators. However, the account tends to consider technological
objects as intermediaries, having the sole function of transporting
information. On the other hand, the discussion forum is completely open
for guests, and software enacts interactive, visible guest users.

In summary, no strong correlation between the two meta-criteria --
length of the chain of action and degree of visibility of the Outside --
can be noticed. None of the cells in Table 16 is empty. However, it
should be noticed that -- while cases whose applications follow
deterministic explanations tend to be associated with software regimes
of invisibility -- projects whose accounts number many mediators can
develop either visible or invisible software regimes. In other words,
cases in whose textual accounts action proliferates in many directions
do not assure for this sole reason a high degree of visibility of the
Outside. Therefore, it could be hypothesized that it is more feasible
for techno-social assemblages to be enacted as fleeting online
communities when it comes to textual accounts, rather than when it comes
to software. The field of the political constituted through software
architecture seems to exert more resistance than text to new elements
that strive to enter the network, to the potential for change and
innovation.

To conclude, this map shows three main advantages over essentialist
definitions. First, being based on two meta-criteria, it brings some
order in a variegated panorama without the need to rely on ambiguous
criteria like focus of interest, level of participation or type of
technology used. As such, it is applicable to a wider range of cases,
and does not require to define the object of study in advance. Second,
by analysing different materialities through which 'communities' are
brought into existence and upkept (i.e., textual, software, but others
can be taken into account), it allows tracing the variegated,
incoherent, and multi-faceted processes through which online sociability
is shaped. Third, as it assesses the degree of permeability of the
distinction between Addresser and Addressees, Members, and Outside, this
map can turn out useful in evaluating the most innovative and
progressive digital assemblages. If we stick to Latour's definition of a
good textual account as one in which community is accounted for as an
assemblage 'made to act by a large star-shaped web of mediators flowing
in and out of it' the first criterion is explicitly normative.[^10chapter07_29] The
second criterion could similarly suggest a normative approach, in which
progressive software architectures would be those that remain open to
the potential for change, those that maintain as porous the procedures
whereby the community is assembled. Nonetheless, it should be kept in
mind that the second criterion focuses on cases in which the Outside is
*digitally* visible or invisible. For projects whose websites are closed
to guests, there are of course other non-digital ways to include the
Other in the course of action, as *The World Starts With Me*'s blended
learning model demonstrates.

[^10chapter07_1]: A revised version of this chapter was presented at the 6^th^
    Wikisym Conference in Dansk in 2010 and published as Pelizza,
    'Openness as an Asset: A classification system for online
    communities based on Actor-Network Theory\', *Proceedings of WikiSym
    2010, 6th International Symposium on Wikis and Open Collaboration*,
    New York: ACM Press, 2010. DOI:10.1145/1832772.1832784,
    http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1832784&preflayout=tabs.

[^10chapter07_2]: Jones Cybersociety; Cybersociety 2.0; Smith, Voices from the WELL;
    Smith and Kollock, Communities in Cyberspace.

[^10chapter07_3]: As discussed in section 3.1, leading internet scholars like
    Castells and Wellman highlight the switch from territorial community
    to networks oriented towards specific interests as a major change in
    the contemporary structure of community.

[^10chapter07_4]: As recalled in section 2.3, according to L. Lessig, *The Future of
    Ideas: The Fate of the Commons in a Connected World*, New York:
    Random House, 2001; it is the end-to-end architecture of digital
    networks that assures the openness of the internet and the creation
    of digital commons. As seen in chapter 1, the focus on the
    decentralized character of internet networks is inherited from the
    hacker culture's attempts to avoid control and, ultimately, from
    cybernetics.

[^10chapter07_5]: With 'centralized' I consider those technologies that allow a
    few-to-many or one-to-many pattern of communication through a unique
    platform. Examples are web-radios, blogs, html web pages. With
    'decentralized' technologies I refer to those infrastructures that
    allow a many-to-many or one-to-one pattern of communication.
    Examples are peer-to-peer networks, mailing lists, wikis. I
    certainly acknowledge that this is a very rough distinction: for
    instance, wikis are a many-to-many technology, but they also rely
    upon a web platform, so that there is a certain degree of
    centralization in wikis, too.

[^10chapter07_6]: We could not find a better word than 'materialization' or
    'emergence' in order to mean the process whereby community condenses
    into a shape, starting from the associations of heterogeneous
    elements. The use of this word does not want to imply a 'natural',
    'biologically inevitable' aspect of the existence of online
    communities, as Rheingold as the digital libertarians postulated
    (see section 1.1). Quite the contrary, here the term 'emergence'
    indicates the artificial process whereby certain elements aggregate
    in a situated, unrepeatable way.

[^10chapter07_7]: Latour, *Reassembling the Social*, p. 217.

[^10chapter07_8]: Rather the contrary, if one should pay attention to the well-known
    controversy between Richard Stallman and Eric Raymond. Actually, in
    origin, the Linux kernel was developed as a sort of provocation
    towards GNU's organizing logic. See DiBona *et al*, *Open Sources*.

[^10chapter07_9]: Callon, 'Performativity, Misfires and Politics', p. 93.

[^10chapter07_10]: Haraway, Primate Visions.

[^10chapter07_11]: Latour, *Reassembling the Social*, p. 127.

[^10chapter07_12]: Latour, *Reassembling the Social*, p. 128 (emphasis in the text).

[^10chapter07_13]: Shirky, 'Social Software and the Politics of Groups'.

[^10chapter07_14]: S. Woolgar, 'Configuring the User: The Case of Usability Trials,'
    in J. Law (ed.) *A Sociology of Monsters: Essays on Power,
    Technology and Domination*, London: Routledge, 1991, pp. 57--99.

[^10chapter07_15]: Akrich and Latour, 'A Summary of a Convenient Vocabulary for the
    Semiotics of Human and Nonhuman Assemblies'.

[^10chapter07_16]: boyd and Ellison, 'Social network sites'.

[^10chapter07_17]: boyd and Ellison, 'Social network sites', p. 2.

[^10chapter07_18]: J. Masanès, (2007), 'Context in a Networked Environment. Some
    considerations before starting thinking about contextualisation of
    online contents'. Proceedings of the *Online Archives of Media Art*
    conference. *re:place 2007. On the Histories of Media, Art, Science
    and Technology* conference, Berlin, 14-18 November 2007.

[^10chapter07_19]: Lovink and Rossiter, 'Dawn of the Organized Networks'.

[^10chapter07_20]: We use the term with the capital F in order to distinguish the
    use that of this mundane world is made on social networking sites
    and alike.

[^10chapter07_21]: Lovink and Rossiter, 'Dawn of the Organized Networks', p. 7.

[^10chapter07_22]: Lovink and Rossiter, 'Dawn of the Organized Networks', p. 8.

[^10chapter07_23]: It is true that blogs allow the Outside to participate through
    comments. However, recall that comments have a very different
    relevance than posts and may be taken down. Furthermore, I would
    add, many blogs -- run especially by institutional personalities --
    do not even offer the commenting function.

[^10chapter07_24]: Callon, 'Performativity, Misfires and Politics, p. 93. *Author's
    emphasis*.

[^10chapter07_25]: Latour, Reassembling the Social, p. 214.

[^10chapter07_26]: It should be noted that a temporal gap occurs between the moment
    when accounts were written for competition purposes (from 2004 to
    2007) and the moment when the websites underwent my observation (in
    2007-8). It is likely that some variations occurred on the software
    side since when the accounts were elaborated. Still, since this
    chapter does not aim to find correlations, but to map online
    communities, this gap is not going to relevantly affect the results.
    If some correlation between the two criteria emerge, that could
    suggest a coherence between the subsequent developments in the
    projects' websites and the initial textual accounts. If no
    correlation emerge, the results won't be less valid.

[^10chapter07_27]: Observation took into account non-web technologies like mailing
    lists and ftp upload that were accessible through the projects'
    websites, but not those that were not accessible through the
    website, like, for instance, *Tonga.Online*'s *Alpha Smart* mobile
    devices, about which no reference could be found on the website.

[^10chapter07_28]: The peculiar editing process devised by *Overmundo* is described
    in section 6.4.

[^10chapter07_29]: Latour, *Reassembling the Social*, p. 217.
