---
Pr-id: Communities at a Crossroads
P-id: TOD
A-id: 28
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# 8. CONCLUSIONS: DROPPING FOUNDATIONAL DISTINCTIONS

At the end of this book, let me recall the question we started with:
'under what conditions is it possible to conceptualize online
sociability in the first decade of the 21st century?'. After the fade of
the 'golden age' of online communities, in mid 2000s, many of the
seeding possibilities for online sociability of techno-libertarian
culture's utopias have come to a crossroads. Myths about the internet as
an intrinsically ungovernable machine, about the creative coalition
between knowledge workers and internet companies, and about the
spontaneous online interactions of millions of individuals worldwide
producing diffuse wealth, stronger participation in political processes,
reduction in social inequalities, and empowerment, are facing counter-
evidence.

Despite this, instead of claiming the ontological demise of online
communalism, this book has suggested an empirical, anti-essentialist
approach to techno-social digital assemblages. Such an empirical
research has asked actors positioning themselves as community
spokespersons what they mean by 'online community'. By analysing the
whole data set of submissions to the oldest competition for art,
society, and digital technology, *Ars Electronica*, I have analysed how
actors speaking for digital communities describe the theories of actions
underpinning techno-social collaboration.

From this analysis, three conditions can be highlighted: in the first
decade of the 21st century it is still possible to conceptualize online
sociability, provided that, first, we abandon the techno-libertarian
communalist rhetoric; second, we recognize the role of social theory's
foundational distinctions in the online communalist rhetoric, and move
beyond it by adopting a material semiotic approach; third, we are
willing to give up the effort to devise definitions of online/digital
communities, and rather engage in a more encompassing mapping exercise.

As to the first condition, we should realize that if many -- although
not all -- of the 'memes' that characterized digital communalism were
rooted in the U.S. cyberculture paradigm, this was not by chance.
Rheingold's virtual communitarian framework was not only rooted in, but
also contributed to *perform* the U.S. cybercultural, libertarian
paradigm. His early book can be conceived of as a rhetorical effort to
merge multiple cultural traits and experiences in a coherent account of
online sociability, along the lines of the dominant U.S. libertarian
paradigm. The virtual communitarian framework was crafted as pliable
enough to allow this converging effort.

Despite this, two elements mark the limits of this effort. On one hand,
not all forms of online sociability can be traced directly back to New
Communalism and the North-American libertarian tradition. Critical
internet culture, new media art practices running on mailing lists,
political movements commonly subsumed under the umbrella term 'No/New
Global', and media activist movements imbibed by hacker ethics have been
suspicious of the idea of harmony, consensus, and order entailed by the
term 'community'. The notion of 'organized networks', for example, has
acknowledged that instability, conflict, heterogeneity, passivity are
the norm, and collaboration, unity and cooperation are exceptions. On
the other hand, when it comes to explain how digital communities are
upkept and reproduced, the virtual communitarian paradigm falls short of
convincing explanations, and materialist perspectives have to be
mobilized.

I will come back later to the need to consider digital communities'
material-semiotic character, in order to understand what they have
become. For the time being, it is important to stress the black-boxing
nature of discourses *on* online communities. Indeed, the analysis of
Ars Eletronica's Digital Communities' data set has returned a definition
of digital/online communities considerably overlapping with digital
communalism á la Rheingold.[^11chapter08_1] In chapter 4, we have seen that when
'digital community' or 'online community' is sown, the data set returns
topics like the distinction between real world and virtual life,
communitarian localism, focus on individuals as agents of change,
suspicion towards institutions and hierarchical forms of reputation. Few
paths were abandoned in the 2004-2007 data set with respect to early
original cyberculture. However, among these the absence of any reference
to the cybernetic discourse and its reliance on technology, together
with any explicit reference to the role of technology, are revealing. In
discourses *on* online communities (i.e., the seeded analysis), the role
of technology appears black-boxed, and artefacts are conceived as mere
tools.

Differently, outside the online community discourse there seems to be
more room for artefacts to be unpacked. The analyses conducted in
chapter 5 and 6 have shown that once the hegemonic cyberculture is set
apart, and the rhetoric about 'online communities' is abandoned (i.e.,
when 'digital community' or 'online community' is *not* sown for
analysis), richer accounts of the role of software artefacts emerge.
Networked individualism and the physical/virtual separation, for
example, are part of the discourse *on* digital communities, but they
are not part of current accounts *by* online assemblages. In other
words, it is only when the rhetoric about online communities is dropped,
that new relations can be accounted for, and artefacts can appear in
their role as mediators keeping human relations going. Historical
continuities can even be traced between specific software architectures
and spatial communitarian arrangements. The neighbourhood-based
spatiality entailed by *Telestreet*'s integrated broadcasting
technologies since 2002, for example, recalls early experiments with
mainframe clients like *Community Memory* (see section 1.2.1).

Moreover, in discourses *by* online communities, early narratives
survive in more articulated ways. Indeed, in the tricky task of
identifying relevant topics and narratives in the data set without
postulating 'online community', we have come to understand what
distinguishes narratives associated with 'free software' from those with
'social software', narratives associated with 'local information through
ICT' from those with 'locative media', those associated to 'work as an
economic activity' from those with 'work as a voluntary act', those
associated with 'public space-based art' from those with 'engaged art'
and 'political art'. By so doing, we have witnessed how issues that are
central to the digital communitarian heritage (see chapter 1) hit the
ground in a much more multi-faceted way in our data set.

The second condition required conceptualizing online sociability and
asks to recognize the role of social theory's distinction between
*gemeinschaft* and *gesellschaft* in online communalist rhetoric. As
anticipated in the Introduction, this distinction was foundational to
modern social theory. Social and political theorists like Durkheim,
Tönnies, Adorno -- together with more recent ones like Beck, Putnam,
Giddens -- legitimated the new sociological discipline by rising
concerns about the industrial, technological society being responsible
for the demise of traditional forms of sociability. Modern,
technology-driven society was conceived by the 'fathers'[^11chapter08_2] of social
thought as suffering from a scarcity of commitment and solidarity.[^11chapter08_3]

It is not difficult to find the echo of this dystopic understanding of
modern relations in contemporary theorizations of online sociability. By
coining the expression 'networked individualism', Castells has
questioned even the possibility of identifying communitarian ties. While
for Rheingold communitarian ties are a specific kind of social
relationship characterized by sense of belonging, structuralist
approaches like Castells' connect them to the decentralized form of
network organization, which fosters individualism and entrepreneurship
as characterizing features of sociability. Wellman has further extended
this distinction to computer-mediated communication supporting the
spread of individualized networks as the dominant form of sociability.
While face-to-face interaction characterized 'groups', in contemporary
'networks' geographical vicinity has been replaced by interest-centric
forms of interaction (see section 3.1).

In contrast to such binary theorizations, my analysis of 920
applications to Ars Electronica revealed that loose networks are not the
exclusive form of sociability when it comes to communal ties online.
Rather, they co-exist with other models of sociability that actors label
as 'groups'. 'Network' and 'group' are not even seen as mutually
exclusive by actors speaking for techno-social communities. From these
results it looks like the relationship between information technology
and social forms is definitely much more variegated than expected, and
social change cannot be linearly inferred from technological evolution.
Rather than a situation where dominant forms of sociability (i.e. loose
networks) progressively replace older ones (i.e. bounded groups), the
results draw a scenario where co-existence has the better of exclusive
binary distinctions. For what above discussed, these results question
not only the ontological character of 'online communities', but also the
foundations of 21^st^ century social theory on the demise of social
engagement and sense of community prompted by technological societies.

With this acknowledgment, I suggest that it is possible to undertake the
*pars construens,* and focus on the artefacts whereby communities are
enacted and kept assembled. Ars Electronica's accounts show that
empowerment, engagement, and eventually communal ties are only possible
through situated material-semiotic entanglements, of which those same
accounts are part. This evidence further questions social theorizations
postulating the demise of sociability and communitarian bounds. More
than marking the end of social and political commitment, information
artefacts, and digital platforms mediate different types of
relationships and enact different types of communities. From case to
case, information technologies, knowledge, and infrastructures can be
conceived of as tools, goals, supporters. They can empower established
social actors in rather deterministic ways, become almost invisible
tools, or trigger new actors.

I have read the differences among discursive roles attributed to
artefacts by recovering the distinction between mediators and
intermediaries. This step has allowed me to include spokespersons'
accounts in the chain of translation that brings communities into
existence, and upkeeps them.[^11chapter08_4] The resulting and unexpected
correlation between type of community (expressed by source of
boundaries, role attributed to artefacts in upkeeping groups and degree
of black-boxing of community's roles and boundaries), and type of
account (expressed by length of the chain of action and ratio
mediators/intermediaries) shows how powerful 'fiction' can be in
enacting social actors.[^11chapter08_5]

The third condition in conceptualizing current online communalism
requires abandoning the goal of devising univocal definitions, and
rather undertakes a more inclusive mapping exercise. A similar insight
was already developed by Patrice Flichy who -- bypassing both
Rheingold's converging account and Castells' dismissive perspective --
had proposed not a univocal understanding of online sociability, but a
taxonomy of early virtual communities (see section 1.2.1). Results
reported in chapter 6 show that theories of action constitute a
multi-faceted landscape, and no univocal definition, nor relationship
between technological and social elements, can be singled out. Despite
this heterogeneity, one should not renounce to make sense of
techno-social assemblages that self-declare as 'digital communities',
for example by mapping them. I have thus proposed 'length of the chain
of action' and 'degree of visibility of the Outside' as two
meta-criteria for a similar mapping exercise. They indicate the degree
of permeability of the distinction between Addresser and Addressees,
Members and Outside, and have allowed distinguishing several types of
digital communities according to the porosity of their textual and
software boundaries.

Indeed, not only accounts, but especially software enacts and upkeeps
communities that would otherwise fade. The way it does so is conducive
to different kinds of techno-social assemblages. Notably, software
embodies regimes of access and visibility which enact specific community
boundaries and roles. Software architectures can help to dilute the
distinction between 'membership' vs. 'otherness', 'inside' vs.
'outside', or they cannot. Software can locate the 'constitutive
outside' by allowing the 'Other' to be visible and present, or it
cannot.

The different types of digital communities mapped by those two
meta-criteria could be reconnected to Paul Ricœur's distinction between
utopia and ideology. According to Ricœur, utopia and ideology constitute
the two extreme poles of the social imaginary.[^11chapter08_6] While ideology tends
to preserve the identity of a given social group, utopia aims at
exploring new possibilities. Therefore, ideology and utopia are involved
in a continuous tension between stability and change. A similar tension
affects the techno-social aggregates mapped in chapter 7 (see Table 16).
Communities included in the second cell on the third row could be
considered as having reached the stage of ideologies. Their goal is to
assure their same preservation: few mediators appear in their accounts
and software establishes impermeable boundaries. On the contrary,
communities included in the fifth cell on the second row might be seen
as lingering at the stage of utopias. They keep including external
elements as mediators and have not yet closed their digital boundaries
to the Outside. If we consider Latour's definition of innovation as a
process in which elements move from one aggregate to another, we may
conclude that these projects are those more likely to innovate.[^11chapter08_7] They
are those that not only remain open to welcome new elements, but that
also face the risk of losing some of their existing elements. Of course,
both ideological and utopian projects correspond to two extremes, and
communities in the other cells participate in the tension, as well.

All in all, the classification system here proposed may help trace
innovation. Innovation, in fact, is hardly traceable through traditional
categorizations like those based on focus of interest, online vs.
offline interaction, weak vs. strong ties, profit vs. non-profit
business model. As they require to postulate well-defined classes before
starting empirical research, those categorizations are intrinsically
unable to trace innovation. Indeed, innovation is about contaminating
existing classes by adding, subtracting or mixing elements. The argument
that conceives of weak ties and unbounded networks as the dominant form
of contemporary sociability, for instance, hinders the observer from
noticing the innovative potential of those aggregates wherein weak and
strong ties coexist and fulfil different but complementary functions.

To conclude, let me return to the first condition and suggest that
putting in perspective the foundational distinction between
*gemeinschaft* and *gesellschaft* allows to conceptualize not only
online sociability, but contemporary techno-social relationships *tout
court*. If indeed there is no specific substance that characterizes
solidarity ties online, then digital communities are not distinct from
other technologically mediated forms of sociability. They are specific
only insofar as software plays a role in bringing them into existence --
along with other artefacts contributing to the chain of action (like,
for example, accounts submitted to a competition). In this light, it is
not clear why concerns about the demise of sociability should be imputed
to modern technologies, nor why digital technologies should constitute
from time to time the cause or the therapy of the individualistic
pathology. As we have seen in the previous chapters, software artefacts
can contribute to enacting multiple, different types of techno-social
aggregates, actors and communities, and their influence is not exerted
along a univocal direction.

While anti-determinism is a long-standing achievement in Technology
Studies, it has been more ambiguously adopted in digital media studies,
which sometimes still propose either the causal or the therapeutical
argument. I suggest that here is where digital media studies and
Technology Studies can face each other: in questioning the foundations
of 21st century's social theory starting from the material semiotics of
technologically-mediated sociability. To prompt this encounter, let me
finally juxtapose Latour's use of the puppets metaphor to overcome
deterministic explanations and media theorist Tetsuo Kogawa's use of the
lines metaphor to distinguish interactive media from broadcasting ones:

> Given what \[sociologists of the social, as opposed to sociologists of
> associations. NoA\] meant by 'outside', namely the constraining power
> of context or the causal determination of nature, there was not the
> slightest chance for plug-ins to deposit anything positive inside the
> actor. Structural forces had to do most of the work -- give or take a
> few small marginal adjustments by the individuals. In their fanciful
> theory of action, this was the only way sociologists \[of the social\]
> had imagined that the string of the puppeteer's hand could activate
> the puppet. But \[...\] the relationship between puppeteers and their
> puppets is much more interesting than that. \[...\] Something happens
> along the strings that allow the marionettes to move. \[...\] What was
> wrong with the metaphor of the marionettes was not their activation by
> the many strings firmly held in the hands of their puppeteers, but the
> implausible argument that domination was simply transported through
> them without translation. \[...\] The puppeteer still holds many
> strings in her hands, but each of her fingers is itching to move in a
> way the marionette indicates.[^11chapter08_8]
>
> The Internet and cable media depend on lines. Lines relate to binding,
> weaving, and streaming. They can bind audience up into a tightly
> integrated \"network\", a marionette-like circuit. However, lines are
> not always tight but loose. Loose lines weave webs. In the
> weaving-weaved web, the signal does not cast itself but streams by
> itself. Casting is an one-way process while streaming is interactive:
> streaming in and back.[^11chapter08_9]

Despite the differences in language, both authors aim at overcoming
approaches according to which action is transported from one point to
another along 'strings' or 'lines' where nothing happens. Conversely, by
affirming that 'something happens along the strings' or that 'lines are
not always tight but loose', the two authors argue for the necessity to
think of action as a 'chain of encounters'.

##

[^11chapter08_1]: This might not be surprising, if one considers that Howard
    Rheingold was involved in the design of the competition since the
    beginning, and part of the first jury board.

[^11chapter08_2]: Although, the fact that they were only 'fathers', without any
    recognized 'mother', might well work as a self-sufficient
    explanation of the scarcity argument.

[^11chapter08_3]: Note to 2018 Edition. Three years after the completion of this
    book, a similar argument was raised by Marres (2012), who argued for
    an 'object turn' in understanding contemporary forms of social and
    political engagement.

[^11chapter08_4]: Sometimes literally, in the case of winning communities who
    received financial support as part of their award.

[^11chapter08_5]: Haraway, Primate Visions.

[^11chapter08_6]: P. Ricoeur, *Lectures on Ideology and Utopia*, New York: Columbia
    University Press, 1986.

[^11chapter08_7]: Latour, Reassembling the Social.

[^11chapter08_8]: Latour, *Reassembling the Social*, pp. 214-216.

[^11chapter08_9]: T. Kogawa, 'Minima Memoranda: a note on streaming media', in Waag
    Society for Old and New Media (ed.) *Next Five Minutes 3 Workbook*,
    Amsterdam: De Waag, 1999, p.104. Author's emphasis
