---
Pr-id: Communities at a Crossroads
P-id: TOD
A-id: 28
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# ANNEXES

## Annex A -- List of Documents

### Document 1 -- Model of entry form for the participation in the Prix Ars Electronica's Digital Communities competition

| COMMUNITY PROJECT                                     |
|-------------------------------------------------------|
| Name of Project                                       |
| Web Address of the Project                            |
| Project Details                                       |
| -- Objectives                                         |
| -- Language and Context                               |
| -- Project History                                    |
| -- People involved in the project                     |
| -- Lessons learned                                    |
| Technical Information                                 |
| -- Technological basis                                |
| -- Solutions                                          |
| -- Implementations                                    |
| -- Users                                              |
| -- Licence                                            |
| Statement of reasons                                  |
| Planned use of the prize money                        |
| Personal Information of Representative of the Project |
| -- Name                                               |
| -- Address                                            |
| -- Organization                                       |
| -- Experiences                                        |

### Document 2 -- Akshaya submission (http://www.akshaya.net)

\*URL of the work: \* www.akshaya.net

\*Project Details\*

\*Objectives: \* I. Universal ICT Access

As a first step, a network of Akshaya e-centers is being set up across
Kerala. Run by entrepreneurs, each centre will be a self-sustaining unit
with the e-literacy programme assuring baseline revenue. Akshaya centres
are being set up within 2 km of every household. 4500-6000 Akshaya
Centers will be developed in the State with the objective of one centre
for 1000 families. The Centres are being connected through broadband
wireless technology. Development of these centres provide direct
sustained employment to at least 25,000 people in the IT Sector. Each
centre is equipped with 5-10 computers, printers, scanners, Webcam,
other peripherals and necessary softwares to carry out various ICT based
services. In addition, IP phones are also being made available in these
centres.

II\. E-Literacy

Akshaya e-centres provide training that not only familiarise people with
the basics and scope of IT, but also ensures hands-on skill in operating
a computer, using the internet and so on. Aimed at creating a 100%
literate state, the programme aims at providing E-literacy to one person
in each of the 64 lakh families in the State. A carefully designed
content module designed in local language is for 15 hrs. for each person
is a major highlights of the programme. The process of providing the
skill sets shall lead to the creation of a long lasting relation between
the Akshaya centres and the families in the catchment, which on a macrom
level will generate a state wide data warehouse and repository; of
relevant content for the families.

III\. Creation of Micro ICT Enterprises.

The Akshaya e-centers are being set up under the sole initiatives of
selected entrepreneurs, who have come forward from among the local
community. These centres are set up as pure entrepreneurial ventures,
with an investment of Rs. 3-4 lakhs per centre. The entrepreneur spirit
has been fully utilised for developing the Micro entrerprise in the ICT
sector. As in the case of any conventional enterprise, these
entrepreneurs display their skills and resources in ICT enabled sectors,
content creation, fulfilling the communication needs of the community,
e-enabling farmers, scholars, medical practitioners, in the community
for total development. These entrepreneurs are fulfilling their social
commitment to impart e-literacy to his community members.

IV\. Creation of ICT Service Delivery Points

The Akshaya ICT access points are envisaged to provide G2C, G2G, C2C and
G2B information interchange and dissemination. Akshaya centers shall
function as decentralized information access hubs that cater to a range
of citizen needs that has an inbuilt integrated front-end. Collection of
utility bills and taxes now done through Friends centres is being
integrated with Akshaya centres, thereby minimizing the transaction cost
to the citizens

\*Language and context: \* Malayalam.Kerala,India,Asia country

\*Project History: \* Akshaya begins to bridge the Digital Divide. It
inagurated on 18th November 2002,by president of India. The akshaya
centres set up by May 2003 and literacy campaign completed by January
2004. Board band connection provided by August 2004 and E-payments
statred

\*People: \* Chief Minister, Secretary-Information Technolgy, Director,
Kerala State IT Mission,District Collector-Malappuram, Mission
coordinator and Assistant Mission coordinator

\*Lessons learned: \* At present, the number of Akshaya centres per
Panchayat is 5- and each centre has 1000-1500 families. The lesson
learnt from the pilot is that the number of Akshaya centres can be
limited to 2-4 per Panchayat and the number of families in the catchment
can be thus 2000-2500 per centre. This would raise the sustainability of
the centres.

\*Technical Information\*

\*Technological Basis: \*

infrastructure at Center-5 pc and periperhals, Wireless Radio

NOC- full fledged NOC

OS-various- Linux at NoC and some centers, Windows

Connectivity- WiFi-802.11 b

\* Solutions: \* E-payment software

rural e-commerce through net banking

\* Implementations:\* Kerala

\*Users: \* Citizen of Kerala

\*License: \*

\*Statement of Reasons: \* Akshaya wis the most ambitious ICT programs
ever attempted in a developing society. The project is expected to
generate a network of 6000 information centres in the state, generate
about 50,000 employment opportunities and throw up investment
opportunities to the tune of Rs.500 Crores, all within a time span of 3
years.

\*Planned use of prize money: \* For creating more content service
delivery platforms in Agriculture, Health and Education

### Document 3 -- Proyecto Cyberela -- Radio Telecentros submission (http://www.cemina.org.br)

\*URL of the work: \* www.cemina.org.br

\*Project Details\*

\*Objectives: \* La meta del proyecto es promocionar la sustentabilidad
social y economica de los radio telecentros que fueron creados y ampliar
el proyecto creando nuevos radio telecentros en otras comunidades para
poder capacitar a cada vez mas mujeres en las TIC y beneficiar a toda la
comunidad involucrada.

\*Language and context: \* El surgimiento de las tecnologias de

comunicaciòn y informaciòn(TIC) ha transformado las relaciones sociales,
la educaciòn, el trabajo, la economia y hasta el comportamiento. Lo mas
interesante es que mismo las mujeres siendo la mayoria de la poblaciòn
en el mundo (y tambien en la populaciòn brasilena) el perfil del usuàrio
de Internet ahùn es prioritariamente del hombre blanco que habla el
idioma ingles, tiene cerca de 35 anos, es de nìvel universitàrio y de
classe A e B. En Brasil, 72% de las mujeres nunca utilizo una
computadora, 86% nunca tuvieron contato com Internet y 30% no sabe lo
que es. Esos datos son para demostrar que, asi como se pasa con derechos
y oportunidades (como educaciòn, condiciones de trabajo, entre outras)
-- que las mujeres tambien en relaciòn a las TIC necesitan buscar
condiciones de igualdad.

Vale decir que hasta las Naciones Unidas ya reconocieron como

estratégico el aceso de las mujeres a las TIC, y ese dato aparece en
tercer lugar en orden de prioridade, después de la pobreza y la
violencia.

Fue pensando en esa estratégia que el Proyecto Cyberela invistio en
capacitaciòn para mujeres en el uso de las TIC y en los

ràdios-telecentros. La distancia de los grandes centros urbanos acentua
la dificulad de aceso a recursos técnicos como la manutenciòn de las
màquinas y la reposiciòn de los equipamentos.

La baja escolaridad entre mujeres y jovenes de eses municìpios es alta,
30% de las mujeres son consideradas analfabetas funcionales. A causa del
poco incentivo y de la poca oportunidad, los empleos son cada vez mas
escasos. En ese sentido también la mejor calidad de los programas de
radio es mui importante, ya que permite un desempeno activo de las
personas que no son capazes de utilizar las herramientas digitales en
corto y médio plazo.

Otra necesidade importante que el proyecto contempla es la capacitaciòn
para proyectos de generacion de ingresos, fomentando el emprendedorismo.

En 2000, el ìndice de empreendedorismo feminino en el paìs era de 29%;
em 2003, ese nùmero subio para 46%. En el Nordeste, region mas pobre,
existe una ampla diversidad de actividades artesanaless desarolladas por
mujeres que pueden ser potencializadas por la geraciòn de emprego e
renda utilizando ferramentas digitais.

Las acciones propuestas em ese proyecto dirigense especificamente a
mujeres, que de acuerdo con todos los indicadores de desarollo humano,
son los segmentos que mas sufren los efectos de la pobreza y de la
desigualdad y ademàs enfrentan el desafio de vencer un prejuicio
històrico de las mujeres que no fueron educadas para lidar con màquinas.

\*Project History: \* Fundado en 1990, Cemina apuesta en el desarollo de
liderazgos comunitàrios femininos como agentes de transformaciòn social.
El medio ràdio fue escojido para esa finalidad por ser el medio de
comunicaciòn mas simples y barato, y que atinge 98% de la populaciòn,
siendo que las mujeres son las mayores oyentes. CEMINA elabora programas
especiales e campanas que son distribuìdas para emisoras de todo el
paìs. Desde 1992, realizo mas de 300 capacitaciones para comunicadoras
populares y liderazgos de mujeres que querian aprofundar el contenido de
género de sus actividades radiofònicas. La Red de Mujeres de Ràdio (RMR)
nascio del deseo de las participantes de los cursos de Cemina de
fortalecer sus actividades y cambiar experiencias. Son cerca de 400
comunicadoras de todas las regiones del paìs que atuan en las ràdios
comunitàrias, educativas y comerciales. Después de diez anos promoviendo
los derechos de las mujeres a traves de la ràdio, el cenàrio impuesto
por las nuevas tecnologias de informaciòn y comunicaciòn (TIC) presento
un grand desafio para Cemina: o las mujeres hacen parte de ese proceso o
serian una vez mas excluìdas de la participaciòn igualitària de la
sociedad. Incluir las mujeres en el universo de la informàtica y de la
internet, sin dejar de utilizar el medio radio, passo a ser prioridad
para la instituiciòn. En 2002, el Programa Habla Mujer gano status de
ràdio en internet. A www.radiofalamulher.com ayudo a intensificar la
estratégia de traer las mujeres para ese universo com la
disponibilizaciòn de contenidos de radio con foco de género y derechos
humanos en Internet. La estrategia seguinte fue la apertura de un
concurso direcionado a la Red de Mujeres de Ràdio con el objectivo de
facilitar el aceso de las comunicadoras de ràdio a las TIC. Vinte y
nueve comunicadoras fueron selecionadas a partir de su capacidad de
mobilizaciòn y servicios prestados a la comunidad a traves de la
actividad en las ràdios, pero la ausencia de provedores de aceso de
internet en muchas ciudades impidio el suceso de todas.

Esas comunicadoras recibieron computadores con programas de ediciòn de
àudio, fueron capacitadas para utilizarlos, ganaron conexiòn de banda
ancha y asistencia técnica por seis meses con el objectivo de mejorar la
calidad de la produciòn de los programas de radio y facilitar el
intercambio de àudios via internet, promoviendo asi la creaciòn de una
nueva red, la Red Cyberela. Esa iniciativa conto com el apoyo del
Programa Infodev del Banco Mundial, de la Fundaciòn Kellogg y de Unesco.

A seguir, Cemina empezo a expandir la conexiòn de banda hancha para toda
la comunidad a traves los ràdio-telecentros, que visan promover la
capacitaciòn para que todas las mulheres esten incluìdas digitalmente,
ademàs de proporcionar aceso a recursos educativos y de generaciòn de
ingresos por Internet a la populacion de esas comunidades. Esas
ràdio-telecentros creadas por Cemina tambien proporcionaron la mejora de
la produciòn de radio, principalmente a nìvel de investigaciòn y de
ediciòn de los programas y campanas.

\*People: \* El equipo principal creador del proyecto:

.Thais Corral, coordinadora general de Cemina

.Madalena Guilhon, coordinadora de comunicaciòn

.Silvana Lemos, coordinadora ejecutiva del Proyecto Cyberela

.Denise Viola, editora del site www.radiofalamulher.com y capacitadora

\[...\]

\*Lessons learned: \* A partir de la experiencia con los
radio-telecentros que fueron creados por el proyecto, la sustentabilidad
social es impactante devido a que las comunidades se aproprian del nuevo
conocimiento para su proprio desarollo.

La mayor dificultad encontrada hasta ahora es la sustentabilidad
economica que depende de la situaciòn economica de cada lugar y es la
etapa en la cual estamos invistiendo.

\*Technical Information\*

\*Technological Basis: \* Todos los radio-telecentros que ya estan
funcionando tienen 10 computadores usados, un servidor, una impresora
multiuso, conexion a una antena banda ancha, softwares para edicion de
audio y toda la infraestrutura necesaria para su funcionamiento.

\* Solutions: \*

\* Implementations:\*

\*Users: \*

\*License: \*

\*Statement of Reasons: \* Dentre todos los proyectos conocidos de

inclusion digital, el Proyecto Cyberela - Radio Telecentros, de Cemina
es el unico que inclue la perspectiva de gÈnero y el apoyo de òrganos
publicos y privados en su implementaciòn asocidos a una ONG. Tiene como
objectivo no solo la inclusion digital pero también el fortalecimiento
no solo el movimiento de las mujeres como de la comunidad local, Ademàs,
se preocupa con la capacitaciòn tecnica y la sustentabilidad de los
radio-telecentros a largo plazo.

\*Planned use of prize money: \* El dinero del premio sera usado para
proporcionar mas capacitacion tecnica y de contenido a las mujeres
comunicadoras que ya estan involucradas en el proyecto Cyberelas --
Radio Telecentros.

### Document 4 -- The World Starts With Me submission (extracts) (http://theworldstarts.org)

URL of the work: www.theworldstarts.org

Project Details

Objectives: Objectives are: - increase knowledge on the whole spectrum
of sexual / reproductive health, - systematically promote positive
attitudes, - coping with negative social and cultural norms and skills
regarding a range of relevant sexual health topics By promoting
self-esteem and gender equality and by empowering young people with
information and skills regarding their (sexual and reproductive) rights
the curriculum supports young people and in particular young women in
helping them to safeguard and enjoy their own sexual and reproductive
health. - learning basic computer skills Butterfly Works experienced
that learning the computer is not only sexy to young people, it also is
a necessity to be able to get any place in the formal economy and most
of all it gives them an ego-boost. Especially designing on the computer
stimulates curiosity to learn more. 'Working with the content' really
helps to internalise information and stimulates young people to have a
positive approach towards sexuality as a starting point in developing
technical and social competencies (eg, negotiation skills, contraceptive
use, the right to refuse sex). Common goal The common goal of WSWM is to
improve the sexual health of young people in East Africa while providing
skills relevant to the job market. To show the need: - the prevalence of
HIV/AIDS in Uganda is extremely high - young people are
disproportionably infected and affected by HIV - teenage pregnancy is
high (over 50% of girls become mother before the age of 18) - abortion
is practiced (although its illegal), often in unsafe conditions (a
significant part by young people) - sexual activity starts at a young
age, between 10 - 14 years old and is often forced - contraception and
condom use is low and adequate sexual health knowledge and - skills are
often missing - poverty leads often to offering sex in exchange for
goods or money - sexual intimidation by teachers is common (the 2nd
largest number of forced sex situations) Although Uganda started early
in the AIDS epidemic with education, current education is mainly
restricted to AIDS prevention and is information based. This not only
led to an information fatigue, also other sexual health problems hardly
get attention. Discussion and talking about sexuality are still taboo.
Community interest Many people in African communities want access to
relevant, detailed information on SRH issues and look for ways to deal
with the SRH problems. Schools and teachers see their former students
becoming infected with HIV and current students having problems and wish
to reach as many students as possible with programs they feel
comfortable with while taking into consideration that they are generally
overworked and underpaid. Young people want relevant information, to be
taken seriously, some badly want help, they are keen to be involved in
new developments such as computers.

Language and context: Context of Uganda WSWM is developed for Uganda but
with the idea of implementing the program in the whole of English
speaking East Africa. During a test workshop (May ë03), 2 Kenyan peer
educators estimated the adaptability of the program for urban Kenya. In
April 2004 the Ugandan version will be piloted in NairoBits in Kenya,
observed by local SRH experts. After the pilot further adjustment- and
implementation plans for Kenya will be made. Tanzanian pilot partners
are being looked into. Important for the context of Uganda and the whole
of East Africa is the educational system: - methods used and lesson
materials are old - groups are large (60/100 students in 1 class is
common) - self-expression and own initiative is not encouraged The WSWM
aims at behaviour change, which needs a more participatory and
experiential learning approach (using experience and activities).
Context of technology use The integration of ICTís in urban East-Africa
is a fact. For most formal jobs, basic ICT skills are a necessity and
the computer has even entered the informal job-market. Missing out on
basic ICT-skills is not an option for talented and motivated youth.
Providing relevant and youth friendly ICT training that attracts youth
to experiment more with computers is therefore also a necessity. Schools
and Telecenters with computers (see map of the current Telecenters in
Uganda) provide computer training, which are mostly international basic
courses with little match to the relevant context of the Ugandan youth.
Besides, integrated computer training is rare. That leads to inefficient
use of computers. The computers are often few, old and lack of good
maintenance, the connection is unreliable. They are however available in
schools and Telecenters. WSWM is developed in full awareness of the
technical possibilities: - web based: cheap to spread and to update,
light to download, burnable on cd-roms, flash player provided -
non-computerised alternatives: exercises have a computerized and
non-computerised version, can even be done using pencil/paper or natural
available material (a methods manual based on locally available material
is provided). - softcopy/hardcopy: if the group is larger than 4 times
the number of pcís available, a hardcopy backup is provided to make sure
a large number of students can participate

\[...\]

People: Core team There are five main groups involved in the project,
they are; - The WSWM development and program teams; Butterfly Works and
WPF, Netherlands - The individual schools, teachers and students who use
/ run the program in Uganda co-ordinated by SchoolNet Uganda - The SRH
partners for knowledge and counselling back up; WIDE and FPA, Uganda -
The SRH partner for online counselling; Straight Talk, Uganda - The
NairoBits project, who run the pilot in Nairobi, Kenya Butterfly Works
www.butterfly-works.org is the group who developed the progam together
with various parties (see appendix for bio). BW develops and produces
concepts which create opportunities and insight for young people in
challenging circumstances, using multimedia. WPF ñ World Population
Foundation www.wpf.org is a Dutch foundation which supports programs
regarding sexual and reproductive health and rights in developing
countries. School Net Uganda www.schoolnet.co.ug links and supports 52
schools and telecenters in Uganda with computers. WIDE is a small sexual
and reproductive health and training office of young trainers in Uganda.
FPA, Family Planning Association has offices and clinics all over Uganda
supporting people in sexual and reproductieve health issues. NairoBits
project Kenya www.nairobits.com is a digital design school for young
people from slum areas in Nairobi. (This school was founded by Butterfly
Works in 2000). Users The users of the program are potentially all
English speaking African youth. The current users are young people 12-19
yrs mainly in Uganda and secondly in Kenya. They are facilitated by
their co-users of the program, school teachers and youth workers. Uganda
The schools in Uganda are all part of the Schoolnet Uganda network. Each
school has a computer lab with 10+ average to old pcís and a medium to
fast internet connection. The teachers are highly motivated and youth
friendly. Students are aged from 12-19 and selected by their peers to
take part. They agree to inform their peers on what they learn as a
pre-condition. Students from the pilot program assist the teacherís with
new students. Schools are from all over Uganda (see map). They are a mix
of day, boarding, all girls, all boys, mixed, poorer, richer, urban and
rural. Kenya The users in Kenya are members of slum area youth
organisations in Nairobi co-ordinated by Nairobits. They are both in and
out of school youth ages 14 to 16. The trainers of the program at
Nairobits are themselves youth from the slums who have become web
designers and teachers. They also have a history of peer education
activities. The trainers in Kenya took part in the preparatory training
in Uganda and due to their relatively advanced ICT skills will be
involed after more SRH training in adapting the program for Kenya. In
this way not only the program users but the making of the progam will
migrate to East Africa. Characteristics of users The users are young
people and of course not a homogenous group. On the computer front they
have mostly no previous computer experience. They can read and write and
have followed at least some formal education. They speak English as a
second language, schooling is in English. The education style followed
in East Africa is denoted as 'Chalk and Talk' with the teachers as
holder of knowledge which the students must copy exactly for good
results. Thus students are happily surprised by the active role they get
to play in the program. Young people are interested in youth culture
such as reggae music, hip hop and gospel and current clothing fashions.
Many users are Christians or Muslims and find their faith an important
element in their lives. Young East Africans are often dogged by poverty
and lack of opportunities either to get educated or work. In urban areas
they have to work hard to avoid crime. In rural areas lack of
information and sadly even food is a problem. The teachers and youth
workers in the program are generally those who are interested in
supporting the young people around them in difficult decisions and
issues in their lives, getting to know young people better and
interested in new and ICT teaching styles. See also the section on
common goal on SRH issues. Resticted use Due to the sensitive nature of
the topic and the embedded nature of the program, access is not so much
restricted as supported. 'live' support is given to teachers and
students who do the program. The teachers who run the program get a week
long training in sexual and reproductive health and counseling issues
and using e-learning in the classroom. They have regular on and offline
contact with a local coordinator teacher who is also running the program
in his school. They are backed up by WIDE trainers who are professional
sexual and reproductive health trainers who they can call to or email
for advice . The students are supported in that when they come forward
with issues related to the course such as sexual abuse or the need for a
HIV test they can be referred to the counselling services or medical
centers of FPA (Family Planning Association). In Kenya where the program
is being piloted the program is similarily supported. As the program
grows the support procedures are being developed.

### Document 5 -- canal\*ACCESSIBLE submission (http://www.zexe.net/barcelona)

\*URL of the work: \* http://www.zexe.net/barcelona

\*Project Details\*

\*Objectives: \* El objetivo del canal\*ACCESSIBLE consiste en trazar en
Internet la cartografía de los puntos inaccesibles de la ciudad, a
partir de las fotografías que 40 personas con distintas discapacidades
físicas envían desde teléfonos móviles a la Web del proyecto.

Barcelona es una ciudad orgullosa de su urbanismo y arquitectura pero un
grupo de personas discapacitadas provistas de teléfonos móviles, nos
demuestran que no todo es tan radiante como la ciudad nos quiere hacer
creer.

Desde finales de diciembre 2005 los emisores han documentado y publicado
en Internet 3.336 barreras arquitectónicas y otros casos de
inaccesibilidad agrupados en las distintas categorías: escalones,
escaleras, aceras, transporte, wc, incivismo y casos de mala adaptación.
Cada caso enviado a la Web es geo-referenciado de manera que aparece la
imagen junto al respectivo mapa local y su correspondiente comentario de
audio o texto.

Los emisores se reúnen semanalmente en consejos de redacción
asamblearios en los que se deciden las zonas de la ciudad a documentar,
se analiza la evolución de los canales existentes y se votan las
propuestas para la creación de nuevos canales. Un ejemplo de canal en
emisión aceptado en una de estas reuniones es el canal\*SI, donde los
emisores publican casos de buena accesibilidad.

El proyecto canal\*ACCESSIBLE se inició a finales de diciembre 2005 y
las emisiones siguen hasta el fin de marzo. La asamblea de emisores ha
decidido crear una asociación para la continuidad del proyecto después
de esa fecha.

El proyecto ha conseguido movilizar a la comunidad de personas con
discapacidad física y también sensibilizar a la opinión pública, gracias
a la amplia difusión que ha tenido en los medios de comunicación
tradicionales y en Internet. El ayuntamiento de Barcelona cuenta con
información directa de los usuarios afectados para tomar las medidas
necesarias para corregir los desajustes de accesibilidad de la ciudad.

\*Language and context: \* El proyecto canal\*ACCESSIBLE se realiza en
la ciudad de Barcelona y es bilingüe: catalán y castellano. El contexto
específico es el de la problemática de accesibilidad con la que a diario
se enfrentan las personas discapacitadas que habitan en Barcelona.

Hay 117.745 personas que sufren discapacidades físicas en Cataluña y
8.000.000 en la comunidad europea. A partir de la misma problemática, el
contexto puede llegar a ser mucho más amplio.

\*Project History: \* El proyecto se basa en la posibilidad de dar voz y
presencia en Internet a colectivos que sufren discriminación. Se trata
de facilitar tecnología móvil de comunicación a estos grupos para que
puedan expresarse en Internet, sin tener que esperar la visión que de
ellos nos dan de los medios de comunicación preponderantes. Son los
propios afectados quienes nos explican quienes son y cuales son sus
expectativas.

Con un historial de investigación que arranca en 2003, se han realizado
proyectos en http://www.zexe.net con los siguientes colectivos:

2004 Taxistas de la ciudad de México

2005 Jóvenes gitanos de Leída y León, España

2005 Prostitutas de Madrid

2006 Personas discapacitadas de Barcelona

En la actualidad se preparan proyectos con otros colectivos de
Manila(Filipinas) y Sao Paulo (Brasil)

\*People: \* Concepto y dirección del proyecto: Antoni Abad

Programación: Eugenio Tisselli

Coordinación: Mery Cuesta

Asistente de coordinación: Pilar Cruz

El proyecto canal\*ACCESSIBLE cuenta con 40 emisores discapacitados que
transmiten regularmente en Internet desde teléfonos móviles con cámara
integrada.

El acceso como emisor esta restringido a los emisores registrados aunque
la convocatoria es abierta a todas las personas con discapacidades
físicas. El sitio Web del proyecto es de acceso público.

\*Lessons learned: \* Por las anteriores experiencias con taxistas
mexicanos, jóvenes gitanos españoles y prostitutas de Madrid, cuando un
colectivo discriminado que no esta acostumbrado a ser escuchado, obtiene
la posibilidad de expresarse en Internet mediante teléfonos móviles, lo
primero que sucede es que no encuentra que contenidos comunicar. Pero
paulatinamente cada colectivo ha ido encontrando los temas que mas le
afectan y también se ha organizado en grupos emisores dedicados a cada
canal consensuado en las reuniones periódicas. Al final siempre han
conseguido articular y publicar canales temáticos específicos del
colectivo y a menudo constituir un reflejo de la sociedad que les
envuelve.

A menudo ha habido que programar especialmente para adaptar el
dispositivo a las necesidades comunicativas especificas de cada
colectivo, como es el caso del canal\*ACCESSIBLE, que incluye los planos
locales de cada caso de inaccesibilidad publicado.

\*Technical Information\*

\*Technological Basis: \* La base tecnológica del dispositivo consiste
en el envío desde teléfonos móviles con cámara integrada, de mensajes
multimedia a direcciones específicas de email, que corresponden cada una
a un determinado canal temático de los publicados en la página Web del
canal\*ACCESSIBLE.

El dispositivo en el servidor Linux consiste en una base de datos
mSQL-php que gestiona los contenidos enviados a cada uno de los canales
publicados.

\* Solutions: \* El dispositivo del canal\*ACCESSIBLE utiliza el
software de envío de mensajes multimedia (mms) presente en los teléfonos
con cámara integrada.

La interpretación de estos envíos en la base de datos del servidor
consigue ordenar los contenidos en canales temáticos públicos en
Internet.

El dispositivo cuenta también con la posibilidad de edición en línea de
los contenidos publicados: eliminación de mensajes, cambio de posición
de mensajes y edición de texto.

\* Implementations:\* El dispositivo ha sido utilizado por los
siguientes colectivos:

2004 Taxistas de México DF

2005 Jóvenes gitanos de Leída y de León (España)

2005 Prostitutas de Madrid

En la actualidad esta siendo utilizado por 40 personas discapacitadas de
la ciudad de Barcelona.

Se preparan nuevos proyectos en Manila (Filipinas) y en Sao Paulo
(Brasil)

\*Users: \* Los usuarios potenciales del dispositivo son colectivos o
comunidades victimas de discriminación que de esta manera consiguen
expresarse en total libertad, sin tener que esperar las opiniones que de
ellos vierten los medios de comunicación preponderantes.

\*License: \* Se planea realizar una distribución pública del
dispositivo cuando esté más desarrollado.

\*Statement of Reasons: \* Porque a partir de tecnología móvil e
Internet abre la posibilidad de que colectivos o comunidades
discriminados puedan expresarse por si mismos y en total libertad.

\*Planned use of prize money: \* 1/3 Investigación de necesidades de
comunicación distintos colectivos y diseño de las interfaces
resultantes. 1/3 Programación de base de datos e implementación de
nuevas funcionalidades. 1/3 Gastos de viaje y estancia para la
preparación de nuevos proyectos en Manila (Filipinas) y en Sao Paulo
(Brasil).

### Document 6 -- Electronic Frontier Foundation submission (http://www.eff.org/)

\*Description of project: \* The Electronic Frontier Foundation digital
community \-- begun in 1990 and growing until the present day \--
champions freedom in our networked world. EFF works through our website,
blog posts and podcasts, online video projects, \"action alerts\" that
encourage personal political involvement, our email newsletter, the
promotion of debates and other interactive events, and online guides and
other information for writers and artists who want to express themselves
digitally.

The people involved in this project include EFF staff, more than 13,000
EFF members around the globe, more than 46,000 subscribers to our
newsletter, and more than 68,000 users of our Action Center.

We address those who create and communicate in the electronic world \--
through digital art, blogs and other online composition, computer code,
or other means \-- as well as those who are interested in technology
policy covering free expression, innovation, and privacy.

\*URL of the work: \* http://www.eff.org/

\*Project Details\*

\*Objectives: \* From the Internet to the iPod, technologies are
transforming our society and empowering us as speakers, citizens,
creators and consumers. When freedoms in this vibrant new electronic
environment come under attack, the Electronic Frontier Foundation is the
first line of defense for the public interest \-- getting people
informed and involved in protecting expression and innovation on the
electronic frontier. Our website and other resources are used to
identify, discuss, and then act on the critical digital freedom issues
as they develop in cyberspace.

\*Language and context: \* EFF\'s communications are primary in English,
with parts of our website translated into Spanish. Our multi-national
staff has assisted groups from Peru to Russia, and regularly tour and
speak internationally. Our headquarters and legal arm are in San
Francisco, with additional offices in Brussels, Toronto, and Washington,
D.C. EFF staff also attends meetings of the World Intellectual Property
Organization in Geneva in order to fight for the public interest in
digital rights on a global level. EFF has inspired companion
organizations in Finland (Electronic Frontier Finland), Australia
(Electronic Frontiers Australia), Canada (Electronic Frontier Canada);
our Blue Ribbon Internet Freedom campaign inspired sister campaigns in
Australia, Belgium, Canada, France, Portugal, the United Kingdom and
South Korea.

\*Project History: \* The Electronic Frontier Foundation was founded in
July of 1990 in response to a basic threat to free expression. As part
of an investigation into \"hackers,\" the United States Secret Service
seized all electronic equipment and copies of an upcoming book from a
games book publisher named Steve Jackson Games, even though the business
had no connection to the \"hacking.\" When the computers were finally
returned, employees noticed that all of the electronic mail that had
been stored on the company\'s electronic bulletin board computer had
been individually accessed and deleted.

In an electronic community called the Whole Earth \'Lectronic Link (now
WELL.com) several informed technologists understood exactly what freedom
of expression issues were involved. Mitch Kapor, former president of
Lotus Development Corporation, John Perry Barlow, Wyoming cattle rancher
and lyricist for the Grateful Dead, and John Gilmore, an early employee
of Sun Microsystems, decided to do something about it. They formed an
organization to work on digital freedom issues raised by new
technologies.

As EFF\'s lawyers began to work through the U.S. courts, other staffers
began building an international community. In October of 1990, EFF
opened a forum on CompuServe, an early online computer service. In 1991,
EFF began publishing its online newsletter EFFector. Also in 1991, we
sent out our first \"Action Alert,\" asking U.S. citizens to contact
their senators to oppose new restrictions on encryption. In 1994, EFF
took its electronic community to the World Wide Web, creating a website
which became the hub of our activism and education work. A year later,
EFF started creating off-line educational forums and organizing
opportunities for supporters. EFF was the first organization to hire an
\"online activist\", and pioneered many of the techniques that political
and civic society groups use on the Net today. EFF continues to
spearhead new projects in both the physical and digital world, but the
website remains the home base for coordinating and disseminating
information to our community.

\*People: \* EFF\'s staff of 27 is the core team \-- including
activists, technologists, artists, policy analysts, attorneys, and event
coordinators. EFF has more than 13,000 members around the globe, as well
as more than 46,000 subscribers to our newsletter, and more than 68,000
users of our Action Center. All sorts of people participate in our
community: artists and writers concerned about freedom of expression in
their digital work, innovators creating new ways to communicate and
connect through technology, activists who want to work with their local
or national governments to change policy, journalists looking for
insight into important developments in the digital world, and dissidents
concerned with the role of technology in oppressive regimes. While the
EFF staff creates or edits most of the content on the public EFF
website, we are constantly soliciting input and advice from the
community, and web posts are as likely to point outward to others\' work
as they are to point inward to EFF\'s projects. Everyone is encouraged
to use the work on EFF.org as part of their own activism and art, and
the site is published under a Creative Commons license.

\*Lessons learned: \* We have learned that a community of educated
people can help influence technology policy on the electronic frontier
and make the digital world safe for free expression and innovation. For
example, in 1996, thousands of websites turned their sites black and
linked back to EFF to protest a U.S. Internet censorship law. Later that
same year, EFF launched the Blue Ribbon Campaign so web users could
signal their opposition to online censorship. Much of the U.S. law was
overturned, and the Blue Ribbon Campaign is still running strong. In
2004, EFF supported the development of Tor, technology that facilitates
anonymous communication. Tor now has hundreds of thousands of users who
are making the system more robust, and protecting whistleblowers,
dissidents, and other activists who need to communicate electronically
in a safe and private way. This year, we have also learned the power of
using YouTube, MySpace, and other social networking sites to increase
the reach of our community. Last summer, we posted an animated video we
created about restrictive intellectual property proposals to YouTube,
and so far it has had more than 1 million views.

We\'ve also learned that the power of the Net can trump the power of
vested politics. For a short period of time, EFF attempted to lobby the
American Congress to take digital freedom seriously. Our experience of
the restrictions of traditional engagement with established powers \--
and the political possibilities of empowering an online community free
from those compromises \-- brought us back to online activism and the
virtual world.

\*Technical Information\*

\*Technological Basis: \* The Electronic Frontier Foundation tries
wherever possible to use open source (libre) software. We have been firm
advocates of the free software approach to development, and have
supported open source projects such as Tor (http://tor.eff.org/) and
MythTV/GNU Radio (we represented them in deliberations at the European
DVB organization).

\*Statement of Reasons: \* For more than 16 years, the Electronic
Frontier Foundation online community has been building and evolving to
serve our ever-changing electronic environment and to protect our
digital rights. The stakes have grown higher every year, as more people
around the world depend on digital communication for artistic and
personal expression, companionship, activism, and political change. EFF
has served -- and will continue to serve \-- as a supporter and enabler
of this global digital community.

\*Planned use of prize money: \* EFF would use the prize money to
continue our activism and education work on our website and around the
world.

### Document 7 -- Free Software Foundation submission (http://www.fsf.org)

\*Description of project: \*

\*URL of the work: \* http://www.fsf.org, http://www.gnu.org

\*Project Details\*

\*Objectives: \* Our main objective is to achieve software freedom for
everyone. The FSF is dedicated to promoting computer users\' rights to
use, copy, study, modify, and redistribute computer programs. We promote
the development and use of free software, particularly the GNU operating
system, used widely today in its GNU/Linux variant; and free
documentation. FSF and GNU Web sites and discussion mailing lists are
places where people can come to coordinate their efforts toward these
goals. All of these efforts improve the ability of people to share
knowledge with each other and build communities around that knowledge.

\*Language and context: \* The FSF itself is based in the United States,
but the free software movement we organize is truly international. FSF
President and founder Richard Stallman speaks all over the world on
behalf of the cause, and delivers his speeches in English, French and
Spanish. As of this writing in March 2005, he has visited Belgium,
Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Iceland, India, Italy, Norway, and Syria \-\--
since the beginning of the year. Around 30% of FSF donating associate
members live outside the United States.

Free software development today is global; the version of GNU/Linux that
we recommend is developed in Argentina. Free software usage today is
also global. GNU/Linux is used in cluster supercomputers and in cheap
computers for the masses, used to run much of the Internet, used for
advanced research, used by the World Social Forum and by large brokerage
companies, and used in the Telecenters of Sao Paulo that provide
computer access to poor neighborhoods. It has been adopted for state
schools in parts of Spain and India.

\*Project History: \* FSF\'s founder, Richard Stallman, had participated
in the cooperating community of the 70s while working at MIT. When this
community collapsed under pressure for commercialization, he decided to
build a new community of cooperation.

However, with the proprietary software that had become the norm in the
80s, cooperation was illegal or impossible. To redistribute the software
verbatim is illegal; to improve it without a copy of the source code is
impossible. To have a community would require replacing that proprietary
software with \"free software\"\-\-\--software that users are free to
change and redistribute (and run). So Stallman set out to develop a free
software operating system, called GNU. Most operating systems are
developed for technical or commercial reasons; GNU is the only operating
system ever developed specifically for the sake of giving computer users
the freedom to cooperate.

Development of GNU started in January 1984. The FSF was founded
inOctober 1985 to raise funds for GNU development, and for promoting
users\' freedom to share and change software. Over the years, thousands
of developers on several continents have joined in developing GNU. As
part of developing GNU, we also developed the concept of \"copyleft\", a
way of using copyright law to defend everyone\'s freedom instead of to
take it away. This is implemented in the GNU General Public License (GNU
GPL), whose first version was released in January 1989.

In 1992, the kernel Linux was released as free software under the GNU
GPL. As GNU was then missing only a kernel, GNU and Linux together made
a complete operating system, which now has tens of millions of users.
This was an early example of a new form of growth: other projects
developing software and releasing it as free software, inspired by the
community that we built.

\*People: \* Richard Stallman, the founder of the FSF and free software
in general, remains the head of the Foundation and the conscience and
soul of the movement. There are now hundreds of GNU programs, each with
its own core team of developers. Thousands of volunteers around the
globe contribute. Any free software user can contribute to a project,
regardless of that user\'s educational background, socioeconomic status,
or geographical location. All that matters is the ability to write code
or documentation and the willingness to share the result and what was
learned in its creation. Volunteers who don\'t write code or
documentation help by engaging in political activism and telling other
people about free software, using the structures and campaigns run by
the FSF as their focus.

\*Lessons learned: \* We have realized how hard people are willing to
work for a cause they believe in. We have learned that, when given a
chance and something to study, many different kinds of people can and
will become programmers and make useful contributions to the free
software knowledge base. What has been difficult, once free software
reached the point of being functionally superior to proprietary
software, and began to attract users and developers who sought practical
benefits alone, is keeping attention focused on the importance of
freedom to cooperate. That is currently our highest priority.

\*Technical Information\*

\*Technological Basis: \* The GNU/Linux operating system consists of the
GNU system plus the Linux kernel. Of the many programs we developed for
GNU (called \"GNU programs\"), the most commonly used are Emacs, gcc,
gdb, make, and mailman. Other free software programs that have grown in
response to the GNU Project include Apache, Perl, Python, MySQL, and
PHP.

\* Solutions: \* Proprietary software is a social problem: it is
distributed in a scheme to keep users divided and helpless. Users of
proprietary software must take what is handed to them, and pay license
fees for that privilege. The source code that would tell them how the
software works is usually a secret; sometimes they get a copy it for a
large payment, but they are not allowed to tell anyone else what they
have learned from it.

Free software solves this problem by giving users the freedom to
redistribute the software, to study the source code, to change it, and
to publish their changes. They are also free to use and pass on all that
they have learned from reading the source code. Users of free software
pay no license fees, and can modify the software to suit their needs.
With the source code they are better equipped to handle problems that
may arise. In handling them, they create and share knowledge that will
help other people as well.

\* Implementations:\* The GNU Project developer tools (the Emacs text
editor, the gcc C compiler, the debugging tool gdb, and the build tools
make and autoconf, among many others) are used worldwide among software
developers. GNU Project packages, as well as much other free software,
are widely used in academia in general and academic research in
particular. The Internet runs largely on free software: the Apache
server, the MySQL database, and the Perl, Python, and PHP scripting
languages run a huge number of Web sites. The vast majority of free
software is licensed under the GNU General Public License. Many of the
technological projects nominated for this award have surely used our
licenses or been inspired by the community we built.

\*Users: \* Software developers benefit by improving their software,
through feedback and contributions from user/developers all over the
word.

Schools and non-profits that are hard-pressed financially can get
quality software that they can customize to fit their needs exactly
without paying licensing fees.

Talented youth with access to a PC running GNU/Linux can learn the art
of software development in the most effective way: by reading large
programs, and making improvements in them. In the past, only the best
universities offered the opportunity to learn this way.

Commercial users that value support and are ready to pay for it can get
better support for their money with free software. This is because
support for proprietary software is usually a monopoly, but support for
free software is a free market. Programmers in all regions can benefit
from the opportunity to provide support for free software, since that is
not monopolized by a rich foreign corporation.

End users benefit by being able to use software that has been vetted and
improved by users around the world, not just the team of one company.
They also benefit from the fact that free software develops under the
control of its users, rather than under the control of one developer. Of
course, only programmers know how to write changes, but everyone can
then use them, and all participate in choosing which directions of
development are generally adopted. Because free software rejects the
\"priesthood of technology\" by inviting everyone to read the program\'s
\"sacred text\"\-\--its source code\-\--users are encouraged rather than
forbidden to learn whatever amount of programming knowledge they might
wish to acquire.

Society as a whole benefits by eliminating the power of software
developers over the users of that software, and by avoiding the
concentration of wealth that proprietary software brings.

The precedent for knowledge-sharing set by the free software movement is
now inspiring sharing and cooperation in other areas, such as reference
works, academic publishing, music, and the arts. Wikipedia is one
example.

\*License: \* The FSF developed the two major licenses that free
software is released under: the GNU General Public License (GNU GPL) and
the GNU Lesser General Public License (GNU LGPL). Thousands of programs
have been released under these licenses. Both of these licenses
guarantee the freedom to copy, modify, and distribute the software
released under them. As a measure of how widely it is has been adopted,
roughly 90% of the almost 4,000 packages in the FSF\'s Directory of free
software (which includes programs licensed under a number of free
software licenses) are under the GPL or LGPL. The FSF also wrote the GNU
Free Documentation License (GFDL) for free manuals and reference works.
For many GNU programs, contributors also assign copyright for their work
to the FSF. This means that the FSF serves not only as author of the
licenses under which most free software is distributed, but also as
trusted holder of the copyrights on many community-generated works. This
role is vital, as it empowers the FSF to use its resources to act as
legal enforcer of the freedoms individuals in the community want
protected as their work is distributed.

It is hard to know how many users there are, since everyone can
redistribute free software and with no obligation to inform us.
Estimates of the number of computers running GNU/Linux range up to 100
million.

\*Statement of Reasons: \* The GNU Project, through developing a free
software operating system and the GNU General Public License, built the
free software community as we know it today. Just think about all of the
various communities on the Web\-\--most, if not all, were made possible
by the ethical and practical idea of free software and the freedom to
cooperate. Wikipedia, last year\'s winner of this prize, is licensed
under the GFDL. MediaWiki, the software it runs on, is released under
the GPL.

These projects, like many others, draw their contributors to a large
extent from the free software community. We cannot claim credit for all
of the projects out there and all of the work that went into them, but
our role in intentionally building this community, in writing the
licenses that these projects predominantly use, and in providing the
space for this amazing growth to continue, made it possible to do them.

\*Planned use of prize money: \* Our newest project is a organizing a
community database on the fsf.org Web site recording which models of
hardware devices fully support free software. This will pressure
hardware manufacturers to cooperate with free software by directing
users to manufacturers that do.

We will continue all of our work in organizing the efforts of the
international free software community. Specific plans in this area
include maintaining our Free Software Directory, which indexes thousands
of free software programs so people can locate software appropriate for
their needs; creating a comprehensive list of innovations made by free
software programmers; and organizing a collection of testimonials from
individuals and organizations who have used free software for their
work.

Another important project in our future is releasing version 3 of the
GNU GPL. The new version will improve the ability of free software to
spread in a context that has changed technologically a great deal since
version 2 of the license was written in 1991. Finishing the new version
will entail organizing a process for obtaining community feedback. We
will also continue enhancing our Web site as a focal point for community
discussions, protecting the integrity of the licenses and meeting the
infrastructure requirements of the free software community as it
continues its astounding growth.

### Document 8 -- Telestreet submission (www.telestreet.it)

\*Description of project: \*

\*URL of the work: \* www.telestreet.it

\*Project Details\*

\*Objectives: \* Since its birth, the Orfeotv-Telestreet project has
aimed at sharing knowledge and technology, giving everyone the means to
practice freedom of expression by setting up citizens open editorial
staffs around the street televisions or enabling people to create their
own street TV. In particular, the project considers the right to access
communication channels a fundamental issue for every citizen as much as
the right to health care and instruction. Indeed, open access to
communication channels is an expression of such freedom of information,
enabling people to take advantage of their rights. The community finds
its common ground above all in the discovery of multiple points of view
to portray the reality surrounding it, but also in the sharing of the
produced video material through the web and the broadcasting. Telestreet
is a bottom-up convergence project where neighbourhood-based
micro-antennas are connected each other by the broadband to share
knowledge. The ultimate aim is creating relational networks and active
citizenship through an integrated use of communication means, from the
most traditional and common-people oriented ones to digital technology.
Everyone can easily set up his own street TV and every street TV can
rely on consociated-televisions collaboration. Thus, what matters is not
how many people watch television but how many people communicate and
speak out. Making television is the opposite of suffering it. This is
what a bottom-up convergence is about: i.e. when communication
re-establishes its relationship with reality. By thinking globally and
acting locally, Telestreet tactically partakes reality, and by so doing
every citizen reaches the opportunity to turn from passive viewer into
active subject of an utterance.

Actually, Telestreet\'s approach to communication induces
non-professional people to experiment and create new spaces of
community, in the neighbourhood as on the web. Indeed, it is the
precondition that the relevant technologies are widely accessible that
allows the \*do-it-yourself\* concept spread and hundreds micro TVs
raise up.

\*Language and context: \* At the moment the project is being developed
in Italy, Argentina, Spain. The choice of a \*traditional\* broadcasting
channel such as air \* although in combination with broadband web and
satellite television \* was influenced by Italy\'s peculiar context for
communication. As a matter of fact, over 60% of Italians access
information exclusively through two mainstream broadcasting networks
(Rai and Mediaset), which, as a consequence, have the power to mould
people\'s imaginary. At the same time, reading rates for newspapers and
books reaches among the lowest in Europe. Thus, within such flattening
of the General Intellect, mainstream television rules unchallenged.

The Telestreet circuit de-structures and re-sematicises exactly the
popular means par excellence, so that whoever has so far been passive
has the chance to overcome such condition by turning into an active
subject of communication. The result is the birth of a citizenship that
becomes active as soon as it takes over the most passive-making
communicative tool, the one where political and symbolic strategies of
Power are greatly at stake in Italy.

\*Project History: \* A group of eight (intellectuals, students,
filmmakers, workers) got the project going because they felt
disillusioned with the Italian mediascape because of the current
monopoly over television communication. Orfeotv was born on June 21st
2002, and on February 20th 2003 \' after a d-day with over 20 street
televisions \' the Telestreet network was initiated.

Nowadays, there are more than 250 street TVs in Italy. Some of them are
communitarian televisions, born out of some public administrators\' will
to implement the Telestreet project by involving their community
members. Every street TV can rely on consociated-televisions
collaboration as far as its legal position, technical issues, artistic
and linguistic matters are concerned.

Orfeotv and Telestreet have gained great attention from people and from
mainstream communication, not only in Italy. Tiny Orfeotv stimulated
creativity of people coming from widely different social classes all
around Italy: they have the possibility to experiment how to produce a
television, rather than being overwhelmed by it.

Besides, Telestreet is acting from a \'glocal\' point of view. It was
part of the No War Tv project, a satellite television born during the
Iraqi war and made by Italian independent journalists and
media-activists. A lot of Telestreet productions on rallies were
transmitted during the war by this television in order to produce
different and Europe-visible information.

Moreover, it is necessary to mention that the Orfeotv-Telestreet project
is illegal according to Italian laws. However, it is constitutional
according to article 21 of the Italian Constitution. In October 2003
some MPs placed an item on the Italian parliament\'s agenda in order to
allow the Telestreets some freedom at least until the phenomenon has
been properly regulated.

Finally, Dutch project Next Five Minutes has recently announced the will
to realise the Telestreet experience in the Netherlands. Reproducing the
hybrid air/web-broadcasting model, it is going to start with the
Proxivision experience.

\*People: \* Orfeotv\'s editorial staff members are 15, though a larger
number of people gravitating around it. There are students willing to
learn how to use new digital technologies, independent videomakers,
people from the neighbourhood who recur to Orfeotv to denounce problems
or to have their interviews broadcasted. Italy harbours about 250 street
televisions with 10 to 15 people working around each one. Participation
in the street television project takes place under the fulfilment of
only three principles: anti-racism, anti-sexism and anti-fascism.
Everyone is welcome to participate, without any limitation and
technology is placed into everyone\'s hands. But above all, everyone can
set up a street television, as happened with the existing ones. Orfeotv
offers theoretical and technical free advice via web site as well as
\'face to face\'.

\*Lessons learned: \* One of the main achievements is the creation of an
editorial staff that infused the project with new energy and a plurality
of points of view. Orfeotv editorial staff produces documentaries,
videos and interviews strictly linked to the area, to life in
theneighbourhood and to the city (Bologna). At the same time, it is
constantly connected with the other members of the Telestreet network
with whom it shares video works, information and digital technology
know-how. The network also organises various events (demonstrations,
audio-visual productions, meetings) of which live air broadcasting and
streaming is often co-realised.

Still, there came a time when the need to belong to Orfeotv\'s editorial
staff was felt by all participants, since, due to a generation gap, the
younger had problems squaring up to the elders, as well as women to men.
The issue has been solved by giving everyone the opportunity to access
the technology to realise videos and to broadcast, so that everyone may
transmit auto-produced material (especially young video makers), shoot
and edit videos, invent formats and so on. Actually, technology \' far
from being a tool for exclusion \' has become a mean to bridge the
Digital Divide regarding age as well as gender.

\*Technical Information\*

\*Technological Basis: \* - Video. The project consists of a very simple
and cheap transmitter-modulator-air signal amplifier transmitting images
by means of an antenna. It takes only 0,07 watts and covers a 300
meters-wide area. We have looked for a very simple technology because we
want it to be accessible for as many people and groups as possible.
Therefore, it is possible to set up a street television with common
instruments anyone may have at home - a digital video camera, a PC, a
video recorder. Furthermore, it is also possible to use a small mixer
for live directing.

\- Web. The Telestreet network is setting up an Internet database,
developed in xml, for all street televisions\' productions, where anyone
can upload their works and download the ones made by the others. The
archive is a very important tool for achieving video material for the
programming of each television. Thus, a web site (www.telestreet.it) has
been realised using free software. It is developed in php language by
means of CMS, in particular MD Pro. The site is an open-access tool for
all the people taking part in the Telestreet project and for whoever
(individuals, groups, institutions) decides to set up a street
television for the first time.

\- Satellite. The possibility to set up a satellite channel (or
terrestrial digital channel when such technology will be the norm in
Italy) is being considered. Every single independent street television
will be able to broadcast its productions through this channel. The
result would be a nation-wide broadcaster with fully horizontal public
and democratic access, where everyone could book his or her daily airing
time via the web.

\* Solutions: \* From a technical point of view, Telestreet does not
occupy other television\'s channels, but uses what we call \'shadow
cones\', frequencies granted to commercial networks but unusable because
of territorial obstacles. This means that - although not having a
regular frequency - the circuit doesn\'t damage other televisions owning
regular transmitting concessions. By so doing, Telestreet shows how
raising up an antenna and broadcasting whatever you cannot watch on
commercial television as well as accessing means of \'emergent
democracy\', is possible, cheap and easy.

-   Implementations:\* At the moment, Telestreet\'s web site presents
    some sections: news (where everyone can publish information
    regarding the mediascape, the Telestreet network, \'), forum (where
    users can discuss about legal, technical, political, creative and
    organisational issues), events calendar, street TVs\' database,
    legal and technical schedules, FAQ, Telestreet open mailing list.

-   

Moreover, some new utilities are being implemented: self-moderated
discussion area and web site for every street TV (blog), integrated
system for video files upload and sharing, video play list for the TVs
programming, xml-developed syndication with other news portals on
media-activism (Italian and international, as well), convergence between
forum and mailing list, creation of local mailing lists, database for
collecting and sharing videos coming from independent areas.

\*Users: \* Street televisions\' users are the neighbourhood\'s
inhabitants, whereas those who use the web site and the video database
are the televisions\' editorial staffs, citizens, cultural associations,
media-activists, people interested in setting up a street television,
researchers studying the Telestreet phenomenon.

\*License: \* gpl, Creative Commons

\*Statement of Reasons: \* Television experiences transmitting with low
costs have already taken place in the last years (in the Netherlands and
Germany, for example). However, what is new with Telestreet concerns
mainly the fact that it is a grassroots circuit implementing the
convergence between a powerful socialising tool like television and a
democratic, horizontal channel like the Internet. It is just combining
these two means that it is possible to create social networks. We have
chosen the \'Digital Communities\' category because the project
Orfeotv-Telestreet is creating social networks fundamental for the
sharing of knowledge and for community communication projects
diminishing the Digital Divide and nurturing emergent democracy.
Starting with an integrated system for grassroots communication (through
an air signal, the web and the broad band) citizens are able to access
communication channels and become experienced with ICT. Thus, this newly
gained freedom to produce communication is the necessary condition for
the development of an active, critic and conscious way of being a
citizen. Indeed, our aims concern the possibility to enable people to
recognise their rights by means of digital and common technologies. From
a theoretical point of view, the questions relates to tactical
relationships between old and new media. Although it is clear that
Telestreet begins as television, the centrality of social and technical
networks in its development makes it a far more interesting hybrid.
Television must be considered a new prosthesis and an extension of the
net: but to avoid another media alternative \"ghetto\", the horizontally
of the net must meet the \"socialising\" power of television. It is a
truism that in our society power is more likely to exercise itself
through exclusion than exploitation. Telestreet has identified the weak
points in one of the main institutions that govern the process of
exclusion. Tactical media are practices based on the recognition that
the most powerful institutions governing exclusion are never just social
but socio-technical. Telestreet has positioned itself critically at the
interface connecting the social to the technological. All this takes
place without any help from public institutions or private enterprises
and suffers the limitations imposed on the project by Italian
legislation which denies public access to communication means.

For this reason, an award would mean above all the recognition of the
merits for an extremely challenging and visionary project, where the
burden is born exclusively by common citizens \' since neither the
Italian government nor its parliament seem to be interested in creating
the right conditions to implement the freedom of expression typical of a
democratic society based on ICT. An award would therefore signal a
strong support for the extended right to self-expression, knowledge and
public access to communication means.

\*Planned use of prize money: \* improvement of the broadcasting
technology and of the web site\'s functionality. Development of the open
satellite channel project (or terrestrial digital). Payment of
management expenses (neither Orfeotv nor Telestreet receive any kind of
funding and they mainly collect money in order to survive). Initiatives
to involve neighbourhood people. Continuity to the productive routine.

### Document 9 -- New Global Vision submission (http://www.ngvision.org)

\*Description of project: \*

\*URL of the work: \* http://www.ngvision.org

\*Project Details\*

\*Objectives: \* To create an historical archive of independent videos
--To organize a distribution network through peer-to-peer, ftp servers,
RSS/RDF feed - To establish a producer and distributor community which
agrees on the use of the Creative Commons licenses and keep track of
their activities through ad hoc blogs - To develop a publishing,
archiving and distribution set of software which is available for other
communities to use: http://devel.ngvision.org/index -To be a useful
tools for independent television which need to share and retrieve
contents (see the telestreet network)

\*Language and context: \* NewGlobalVision is rooted in the Italian
context and is mostly in Italian but it is increasingly moving toward a
European and transcontinental space.

\*Project History: \* NewGlobalVision was born in 2001 in a very Italian
context and strongly connected with global struggles. It was born
immediately after the tragic days of the G8 demonstrations in Genoa
(July 2001). Those days were characterised by a clear mystification of
reality by global power and a shameful censorship of information by
official media. The Italian community of media-activists immediately
felt the need to create a new tool to publish and share all the video
materials that has been produced after those terrible days, video and
images which tells other stories from mainstream media, as well as
documentaries which has been censored by official TV broadcasts. From
July 2001 up to now (march 2004), the project has been increasing the
number of videomakers which use it to distribute their own productions.
The project developed an awareness of questions connected to independent
distribution, especially that of licences, proposing the Creative
Commons as a possible solution. The numbers of downloads increase in a
very significant way as does the variety of contents. NGV became a tool
in the hands of the new born Telestreet network (terrestrial low
frequency Italian pirate TVs). NGV opened itself to European and
international communities, it develops RSS/RDF feed to be a tool for
international video projects in a decentralized way
(http://oceania.indymedia.org/newsreal.php). It becomes available on
different peer-to-peer networks (from edonkey to bittorrent), it
increases the number of ftp serves available, it develops an automatic
upload system (http://upload.ngvision.org) which is also becoming an
useful editorial tools. Last but not least, Ngvision is addressing the
importance of Blogs for producers and it releases a monthly newsletter
to all the users. NGV created a mailing list for the producers
community, to share points of view on creation and techniques. Some
data: 2002 -\> 6395 visits / 106330 hits; 2003 -\> 72709 visits /
1520892 hits; 2004 -\> 21590 visits / 404561 hits.

\*People: \* Together all over Italy using a mailing list as the main
mean of discussion together with internet relay chat and physical
meetings. About 20 groups are involved as members and users, between
them there is the ECN community which technicals resources are used by
NewGlobalVision. All the individuals and groups involved have different
attitudes and approaches; there are hackers and technicians who take
care of the servers and develop the software paying particular attention
to accessibility and videomakers and artists that are more interested in
promoting the tools and creating a community as an alternative to the
official media. All the people involved in the project are strongly
driven by a desire for the autonomy and independence of communication,
and of sharing knowledges. Because of these reasons access to the
project is open and promoted through workshops and laboratories.

\*Lessons learned: \* The objective was to have space and bandwidth to
archive and distribute independent video productions. We also had to
address the problems related to downloading: how to have enough
bandwidth to let many users download the same video file? The problem
was solved setting up a network of ftp servers that are automatically
updated. A file is named ngv\_place\_language\_date\_name.avi/mov so
that it is easy to find on peer-to-peer networks (edonkey, bittorrent).
This system is actually working, but not in all its possibilities. The
culture of peer to peer is still to be disseminated amongst ngv users.

\*Technical Information\*

\*Technological Basis: \* New Global Vision is based on a set of
software developed in a unix system environment and it can be used by
any other archiving and distributing project. FTP servers and
peer-to-peer technologies (edonkey- bittorrent) are used to distribuite
the files. Data mining tools are also used and a distributed database
system is to be implemented.

\*Users: \* The users and beneficiaries of NGV are the coming
communities of independent producers, not only Italian but international
and European. Amongst its users are also all those who love to download
and watch good documentaries or movies from the Internet or to access a
good source of direct information. It is important to remember that the
beneficiaries are also the media networks such as the Italian Telestreet
network and satellite TVs all over the world, as long as they can access
NGV as a source for their programs.

\*License: \* The set of software of Ngvision is released under the GPL
licenses, while Creative Commons licenses are applied to all the video
inserted in the NGV archive

\*Statement of Reasons: \* NGV is a young project but in 4 years it has
grown really fast with up to 300 videos uploaded?. - NGV is a pioneer in
video archiving and distributing communities and up to now is one of the
few really functioning systems - NGV is a decentralized tool which works
for everyone who wants to create a digital community around video
sharing (see oceania newsreal which uses ngv RSS/RDF feed) - Due to
actual political situation NGV is a crucial tool for the Italian
independent media community - NGV is not static but keeps developing,
especially for giving tools to producers to exchange information -- NGV
helps in the process of transforming the user into the producer - NGV is
not only a digital community but reaches into the non-digital as it is a
tool to create a common space of information which are broadcasted on
terrestrial frequencies or screened in cinemas.

\*Planned use of prize money: \* The money will be used to pay for
hardware implementations, hard disks and a new server which will be used
for live streaming and streaming of a cycle of the last five uploaded
videos. The streaming will be done in mpeg4 using a Darwin server. The
streaming will be automatically broadcast by any independent television
who wants to connect.. NGV already experimented with the streaming but
we need a dedicated server to do so. The money will be also used to
organize series of workshops and laboratories all over Europe to share
the necessary skills to be part of the NGV community. To promote sharing
of skills is a very important thing that helps the network of
independent pirate tv (telestreet) and alternative media to connect to
one other. Ngv is also preparing a catalogue with all the available
videos. We would like to use the money to print and distribute the
catalogue to promote screenings in different venues.

### Document 10 -- Overmundo submission (extracts) (www.overmundo.com.br)

\*Description of project: \* Overmundo is at the same time a community
and a software tool. Its goal is to promote the emergence of the
Brazilian culture, in all its complexity and geographical diversity.
Overmundo was created by a group of four people, who coordinated the
efforts of other 35 collaborators. Overmundo is open to anyone at large.

Overmundo today consists of the largest community of people in Brazil
aimed at promoting a big and neverending conversation about the
Brazilian culture. Using \"web 2.0\" tools, individuals and groups from
all over the country write articles, post pictures, films, music, texts,
describing their own places and communities, and creating national
visibility for cultural events and scenes all over the country. Before
Overmundo was created, these possibilities seemed almost unimaginable. A
quick glance at one single article at the website demonstrates the
diversity and comprehensiveness of the conversations taking place on it.
It is easy to perceive the multiple diversities brought together by
Overmundo: diversities of age, gender, race, geography, and above all,
worldviews.

\*URL of the work: \* www.overmundo.com.br

\[...\]

\*Project History: \* The origin of Overmundo goes back to 2003, when
the anthropologist Hermano Vianna was invited by Minister of Culture
Gilberto Gil to think of a project that would integrate cultural
movements and scenes from all over Brazil. Hermano then created the
project Movimento (Movement), that would count with the help of
collaborators spread all over Brazil, creating a network of individuals
and institutions dealing with cultural production.

The project was then modified by the Ministry of Culture, and eventually
became the general framework for the Pontos de Cultura ('Cultural
Hotspots') project successfully developed by the Minister.

Nevertheless, the total potential of the Movimento project remained yet
unexplored. In 2005, Petrobras, the largest oil company in Latin
America, and the most important financer of the arts in Brazil (every
year Petrobras invests more than U.S.\$120 million in financing cultural
projects in Brazil) invited Hermano Vianna to help solving a problem.

The problem was that Petrobras was financing a broad range of cultural
productions in Brazil, but the majority of those productions were simply
being lost, or quickly becoming unavailable to the public. For instance,
Petrobras was financing the recording of CD¥s by numerous artists, music
compilations from indigenous communities, documentaries, short-films,
books, plays and all sorts of cultural manifestations. These cultural
artifacts were in general printed in limited issues (sometimes only a
few cds were printed, or a few books). Quickly the cds were distributed,
very feel copies were left, and the majority of the public still had
permanet point of access to those cultural productions. Accordingly,
Petrobras realized that its huge investments in culture, such as
recording an album, or restoring a compilation of traditional music,
were becoming ineffective. There was virtually no use of digital
technology or the Internet as a distribution channing or for archiving.

Hermano Vianna was then invited by Petrobras to develop a project to
build a 'digital magazine', a website who would compile and store all
the cultural production sponsored by Petrobras. Hermano then invited a
team of three other collaborators to discuss the invitation. The team
came to the conclusion that they would have no interest in developing
this 'digital magazine'.

Accordingly, the team decided to make a counter proposal to Petrobras.
They would create a website where Petrobras could include its sponsored
cultural products. However, that should not be the focus. Instead, the
group said it was interested in trying to solve a bigger problem of the
Brazilian cultural context. The group would only accept the invitation
if the website was entirely collaborative, and open to any one in the
country to contribute with articles, and any other sort of cultural
productions. In other words, the group proposed to use the tools of the
so-called 'web 2.0', but mxing them up in order to solve the particular
goals they had in mind.

After a couple of weeks, Petrobras agreed to give complete and absolute
freedom for the group to develop the website.

The strategy proposed by the group (named as 'Group of Ideas Movimento')
creating the best possible environment for collaboration and
participation. Nevertheless, Movimento had it clear that the challenge
was not only technological, but also of community-building. How to build
a community in a country with more that 186 million people, and with
vast geographical diversity?

The strategy devised for building the community was as follows.
Movimento would hire one contributor in each of the Brazilian states (27
in total). These contributors would be responsible for writing
periodically to the website for a period of 18 months, about the culture
of their own states. The contributors would also be responsible for
'agitating' and 'energizing' other contributors in their own states to
start contributing to the website as well. The contributors of this
group were called 'Overmanos' and 'Overminas' (meaning 'Overbros' and
'Oversistas').

The assumption of Movimento was that after 18 months Overmundo would
have been able to achieve enough content and momentum to continue the
task by itself, only with the support of a decentralized community,
built with the original help of the Overmanos and Overminas. To achieve
that, the budget for the project would cover the payment of all
Overmanos and Overminas, 28 in total, one for each state of Brazil and
two for the state of Sao Paulo. The total budget of the project,
including technological development and sustainability of the community
of collaborators for 18 months was of U.S.\$1 million.

The technological development of the site started in June 2005. A
national meeting with the selected Overmanos and Overminas was made in
October 2005 (a weblog reporting the meeting can be found at
www.overmundo.blogspot.com.br). After the meeting, the group of 28
overmanos and overminas were hired in November 2005, to start producing
the initial content for the website. A temporary website was posted
online, based on a wordpress platform. The website would publish 1
single article everyday, until the official launch of the website,
programmed to March 2006.

Accordingly, for more than 4 months, one article was published per day
at the Overmundo website, at the time, a conventional weblog. That
helped calling a little attention to the project, and gave the Movimento
Group time to work on the technological tools that would be used in the
final website.

On March 2006, the official Overmundo website was launched, with all its
collaborative tools, making it possible to receive decentralized
contribution of anyone. Also, the editorial board of the website was
also collaborative: the community itself was responsible for deciding
what to publish or not at the website, and also what should have more
visibility and make the headlines of the website.

Three months after the launch, the Overmundo model and strategy proved
to be extremely successful. The success was so surprising, that the
original group of paid overmanos and overminas proved to be no longer
necessary: almost 100% of the content of the website at that time
started to be produced by decentralized contributions. Nevertheless, the
overmanos and overminas were kept for other additional 3 months, but
changing completely their role. Instead of producing content to the
website, the overmanos and overminas became exclusively 'agitators',
disseminating the idea of collaboration and bringing people interested
in creating visibility to their cultural activities to contribute to the
website.

The community was then built, and it was a very comprehensive one. Not
only there was a huge demand for dissemination of culture (almost as if
culture always wanted to emerge, but did not have the means for doing
that), but also people started quickly to realize that by posting
contributions at Overmundo they were opening a channel for cooperation,
for visibility, for building alliances, and for receiving commentary and
help from people from all over the country.

As a result, the U.S.\$1 million budget predicted to fund the overmanos
and overminas was no longer necessary in its totality. Only a portion of
it had been used after 6 months of the project, and the project was
already clearly successful. Petrobras was so happy with the results that
they actually inquired Overmundo whether it would like to receive more
funding for the full year of 2007 (since the original budget covered the
website activities only until July 2007). Unanimously, the group refused
to receive more money, and instead, extended the duration of the project
until the current budget allows it to continue.

Finally, the development of Overmundo was divided in three phases:

1\) technological development and launch of the website

2\) building the community and expanding its outreach and collaboration

among its members

3\) finding ways of self-sustainability for Overmundo

Phases (1) and (2) have been successfully completed. The challenge ahead
of Overmundo is now how to achieve its own self-sustainability, becoming
independent from any external financers. The Movimento Group is
currently focused on this task.

\[...\]

\*Solutions: \* At Overmundo, the community is king. It produces all the
content, and it also decides what content to publish, and what content
should gain more visibility.

For achieving this goal, Overmundo incorporated a broad range of 'web
2.0' tools.

As mentioned above, the goal was that 100% of the content was produced
by the community and edited by the community. But then, how to achieve a
quality control system?

The strategy for that was primarily inspired by the Kuro5hin
(www.kuro5hin.org). Every item that is contributed to Overmundo goes
first to the 'Editing Line' (Fila de Edição). For 48 hours, the item
remains on it 'quarantined'. During this period, any user can make
suggestions and comments. The author decides whether the item should be
modified or not according to the suggestions. Only the author can modify
the item (different from the Wiki model).

After the 48-hour period, the item goes to the 'Voting Line' (Fila de
Votação). During this period, users of the website can vote whether they
liked the article. The voting system is similar to Digg (www.digg.com).
However, there is an important difference. At Digg, the order of the
items does not correspond to the order of the votes (if one goes to the
Digg page, there will be articles with less votes on top of articles
with more votes). The reason for that is that the algorithm used by Digg
is not open - only the website knows the true 'points' that an article
needs to be on the top. Overmundo adopts a system of 'Overpoints', that
is, each vote gives the article a certain number of overpoints. And the
position of the article at the website is determined according to the
number of Overpoints. Accordingly, the algorithm is clear.

In order to be finally published at the website, the article has to
receive a minimum amount of Overpoints. Once the minimum amount of
points is achieved, the item is published at an intermediary position.
From that position, the article can continue to be voted, moving to the
top and eventually achieving the headline of the website. If the item is
not voted, time takes its Overpoints away, and the article is brought
down.

Overmundo also uses a system of 'karma', by which users can earn
reputation points at the website. Users with higher 'karmas' will have
more Overpoints than users with smaller karmas, and therefore, more
editorial powers. Accordingly, the karma system is helping Overmundo to
build a decentralized governance model for the website site. The 30
users with the highest karmas are now being invited to a separate
discussion list. Our goal is that in the near future, the whole
governance of the website will rely on these 30 users, which will be
renewed periodically, according to their karma variations along time.

In order to view all the other websites considered by Overmundo in its
design, it is worth checking the credits webpage of the website at the
following address:

http://www.overmundo.com.br/estaticas/creditos.php

### Document 11 -- dotSUB submission (http://dotsub.com)

\*Type of project:\* browser based tool enabling any film or video to be
subtitled into any language without any downloads or training, in an
open source wiki type of way. The final video, with all languages, is
viewable and embeddable from any website in all languages.

\*Description of project: \* VISION

dotSUB provides tools that change language barriers into cultural
bridges. By putting seamless video subtitling technology into the hands
of individuals, dotSUB tools make stories from every culture accessible
to every culture, fostering intercultural experience, communication, and
connection.

MISSION

As a result of the Internet?s ability to connect us to our most distant
neighbors, we are now able to share our collective creative output as
never before. With words, images, music, and video moving across the
globe in a matter of seconds, we collectively possess a new innovative
power for cross-cultural communication.

The emergence of relatively inexpensive digital video technologies and
low cost storage and bandwidth have radically democratized our ability
to tell compelling stories. We are limited only by our imaginations and
our neighbors' capacity to understand the language that weaves the
images together.

We believe that video is a universal language and the world's appetite
is increasing as viewing and showcasing technologies continue to evolve.
Until now however, the ability to seamlessly subtitle videos in multiple
languages has curbed the opportunities for creators and viewers to
maximize the potential of the medium.

As educators, governments, NGOs, and corporations increasingly create,
utilize and rely on moving images as crucial communication tools, we
believe that there is a tremendous opportunity for a new technology tool
that increases the potential of digital video. Additionally, as
traditional media companies exercise more control over distribution of
content, dotSUB provides an alternative approach for new media models to
make content available to more people.

RATIONALE

Regardless of whether one is a professional filmmaker, a corporate
trainer, a teacher with a new curricular idea, a student with a burning
passion, or an organization with a specific message?video has become the
creative medium of choice. It is transformative and unique. It
encourages a kind of creative energy that fosters new thought and new
creativity and new pathways for identifying and solving problems.

Using the dotSUB tools, filmmakers and owners of film content have the
ability to see their work subtitled in multiple languages and thus made
available to much larger global viewing audiences. Even when
distribution agreements are in place, films are not often translated
into more than a small handful of languages. Rather, they are made
available in languages with easily recognized market audiences.

\*URL of the work: \* dotsub.com

\*Project Details\*

\*Objectives: \* TO FACILITATE CROSS CULTURAL COMMUNICATION THROUGH
VIDEO AND FILM, IN ANY LANGUAGE, USING A RADICAL NEW BROWSER BASED TOOL

\*Language and context: \* THERE IS NO GEOGRAPHICAL LOCALE FOR THIS
PROJECT, AS IT IS LANGUAGE NEUTRAL. IT ENABLES VIDEO OR FILM FROM ANY
LANGUAGE TO BE SUBTITLED INTO ANY OTHER LANGUAGE ? ALL GENRES, SUBJECTS,
LENGTHS, FORMATS, ETC.

\*Project History: \* THE PROJECT WAS BORN OUT OF MY FRUSTRATION WITH
THE DIRECTION THE WORLD WAS GOING IN THE PAST 5 ? 10 YEARS. AS DIGITAL
TECHNOLOGY WAS ENABLING QUICKER, CHEAPER AND FASTER GLOBAL
COMMUNICATION, THE WORLD WAS GROWING FURTHER AND FURTHER APART. I WANTED
TO CREATE AN ELOQUENTLY SIMPLE TOOL TO ENABLE ANYONE, IN ANY COUNTRY,
SPEAKING ANY LANGUAGE, ASSUMING WE HAD THE PERMISSION OF THE RIGHTS
HOLDER, TO BE ABLE TO SUBTITLE ANY FILM OR VIDEO FROM ONE LANGUAGE INTO
ANY OTHER LANGUAGE WITH OUT ANY DOWNLOADS OR TRAINING.

IT STARTED IN 2004, TOOK 2-1/2 YEARS TO DEVELOP THE TECHNOLOGY, AND WE
HAVE BEEN EXPERIMENTING WITH ITS POSSIBLE APPLICATIONS AND USES FOR THE
PAST 8 MONTHS.

\*People: \* 3 PEOPLE ON THE CORE TEAM ? MICHAEL SMOLENS ? CHAIRMAN AND
CEO, LAURIE RACINE ? PRESIDENT, AND THOR SIGVALDASON ? CTO. THE PROJECT
IS TOTALLY OPEN.

\*Lessons learned: \* OUR PROJECT IS A DOUBLE PARADIGM SHIFT IN THINKING
FOR MOST PEOPLE, AS THE ABILITY TO EASILY, QUICKLY AND INEXPENSIVELY
(MOSTLY FREE) ABILITY TO SUBTITLE VIDEO INTO OTHER LANGUAGES HAS NEVER
EVEN BEEN A REMOTE DREAM. AS MORE AND MORE ORGANIZATIONS/COMPANIES BEGIN
TO UNDERSTAND ITS POTENTIAL, THE VARIETY OF USES FOR OUR TOOL IS
INCREASING WEEKLY.

\*Technical Information\*

\*Technological Basis: \* A BROWSER BASED TOOL, REQUIRING NO DOWNLOADS.
HUMAN BEINGS ENTER TEXT INTO THEIR BROWER (SEE DEMO AT
http://dotsub.com/demo/) - AND THE TEXT IS STORED IN A DATA BASE ON
DOTSUB SERVERS. THE VIDEO FILE CAN RESIDE ANYWHERE, AND THE VIDEO PLAYER
AND FUNCTIONALITY ARE EMBEDDABLE. WHEN A SPECIFIC LANGUAGE IS CHOSEN, IT
SELECTS THAT TEXT AND RENDERS IT ON TOP OF THE VIDEO AS IT IS PLAYING.

\*Solutions: \* ALREADY ANSWERED ABOVE

\*Implementations:\* VIDEO PODCASTS, NON PROFITS, NGO?S, CORPORATIONS

\*Users: \* ANYONE WHO USES VIDEO AS A TOOL OF COMMUNICATION, EITHER IN
EDUCATION, HEALTHCARE, MEDIA, ENTERTAINMENT, LAW, POLITICS, ETC.

\*License: \* IT IS AVAILABLE GENERALLY AS A FREE TO USE, FREE TO EMBED
API, AS LONG AS THE CONTENT OWNER HAS NO COMMERCIAL APPLICATIONS FOR
THEIR CONTENT. IF THE CONTENT OWNER HAS PLANS TO MONETIZE THEIR CONTENT
IN ANY LANGUAGE MADE POSSIBLE USING OUR TOOL, WE WILL WORK EITHER ON A
REVENUE SHARE, LICENSE FEE PER STREAM, OR WORK FOR HIRE ? DEPENDING ON
THE NEEDS, DESIRES AND BUDGETS OF EACH CLIENT.

\*Statement of Reasons: \* AS THE WORLD BECOMES MORE WIRED, AND
BANDWIDTH COSTS DECREASE, WITH VIDEO ENABLED PCS, MOBILE DEVICES, AND
OTHER VIEWING SCREENS BECOME UBIQUITOUS, IT BECOMES MORE AND MORE
IMPORTANT TO BE ABLE TO VIEW AND UNDERSTAND THE FEELINGS AND PASSIONS
AND FEARS OF PEOPLE IN ALL CULTURES. TRADITIONAL MEDIA, AND EXISTING
SUPPLY CHAIN TECHNOLOGIES, ESPECIALLY TOUGHER AND TOUGHER COPYRIGHT
RULES MAKE THIS NEARLY IMPOSSIBLE FOR ALL BUT THE BEST FUNDED FILMS.
DOTSUB HOPES TO BE ABLE TO MAKE ANY VIDEO OR FILM AVAILABLE IN ALL
LANGUAGES ? AN EFFORT THAT COULD HAVE PROFOUND IMPACT ON THE WORLD.

\*Planned use of prize money: \* FURTHER ENABLE WORTHY NON PROFITS AND
OTHER EFFORTS WHO NEED HELP COMMUNICATING ACROSS CULTURES.

### Document 12 -- Open Clothes submission (http://www.open-clothes.com/)

Description of project: \"Open-Clothes.com\" is a community on the
Internet for who makes clothes, for who wants clothes, and for everybody
who likes clothes.In which community, anyone can participate for free on
the theme of \"making the clothes of \'I\' size\". \"Those who make\"
can enjoy making clothes, at their own pace conveniently. \"Those who
wear\" can enjoy making clothes which matched liking and the body
exactly. \"Open-Clotes.com\" community is compared to a tree. First,
wooden \"trunk\" is the making-clothes network of \"those who make.\"
The function of community is substantial from information exchange to
work sale as if annual rings may be piled up. The network which supports
activity from beginners to experts in connection with making dress as an
individual is formed. Then, it is a \"branch\" bears fruits, the works
born from the network of \"those who make\" . \"Those who wears\"
gathers in quest of \"clothes with stories.\" The micro demands of \"how
it is made\", \"wanting such dress fits me\", etc. which are difficult
to respond on a ready-made, are realized, together with \"those who
make.\" It is the common manufacture system of \"those who wear\", and
\"those who make.\" Moreover, a \"root\" is required to suck up
nutrition and send to a trunk. The cooperation with the professional
contractor who become a foundation supporting activity of \"those who
make\" is indispensable to making clothes. Then, in Open-Clothes.com,
the common production system of \"those who make\", and \"the
contractors who make\" is built. \[1\] Individuals with the energy of
making a thing gather and build \"society\". \[2\] The new \"culture\"
is produced, which finds out the value in the produced work which is
different from ready-mades. \[3\] The \"industry\" will be cherished,
which supports making the thing, value added and can respond to a
market. Healthy tree may attach rich leaves and rich fruits on a trunk,
and returned to the ground as nutritive substance. They may be taken in
from the root and may send out to a trunk and the growth may be
continued.Like the tree, culture, and industry and a social system
cooperation is realize according to the power of the community and the
continuation of making dress. We \"Open-Clothes.com\" think such
expansive circulation will be produced.

URL of the work: http://www.open-clothes.com/

Project Details

Objectives: Open-Clothes carries out the help which finds such \"making
the clothes of \'I\' size\" out of communication. People who participate
\"Open-Clothes\" can have much possibility. \* Who \"Wants to make\" can
- cancel questions and troubles with information exchange. - present her
/ his works and hear opinions and evaluations about them. - sell works.
- perfome manufacture management. - find business partners. - share sale
/ advertisement channels. - produce with a few lot. - harness her / his
knowledge and technology. \* Who \"Wants to wear\" can - buy clothes,
looking at the background of manufacture. - make the clothes suitable
for size or liking from \"JOINT MADE\", which means make together with
those who make. - study happily and be a person \"who makes.\" We will
realize the \"clothes\" environment opened by knowledge and technology
of all people in connection with clothes \-- that is, \--
\"Open-Clothes.\" Clothes are the themes in connection with all people.
We think optimal \"clothes\" environment will be required for people
with the style which is different in each. Through construction,
management of \"Open-Clothes.com\" which is community computing
environment, we will discover and solve subjects in connection with
clothes. We aim at the following gradual results. - Offer of a choice
called new production / circulation in a fashion field. - Offer of the
place where we can find the partner based on a style. - Opportunity
creation of a work and a volunteer. - Construction of the knowledge
database about clothes. - Edit and offer of teaching materials about
clothes. - Construction of a clothes database. - Secondary use as
resources of common products, and protection of a right. - One to one
production. - Development and improvement in clothes related technology.
- Energy curtailment by cooperation of apparel systems. - Realization of
the high quality human service on the Internet. - Activation of
production. - The proposal of the sustainable and expansive management
technique of community energy.

Language and context: From now on we are active only in japan. We are
affected by the diversity of japanese fashion. There is no class in
japanese fashion. And the passion for fashion is very strong in Japan.
There is the student with full of the motivation in \"I want to study
making dress\", the young designer who asks for the place of the further
activity with her / his brand, the fashion professional which are
engaged in making dress as an occupation, the housewife and \"the fine
elderly people\" as a former pro desires works and volunteers to harness
knowledge and technology after retirement, the person who enjoys making
dress at their pace as a hobby. Although the production shift to China,
consumption depression, etc. pose a serious problem in the apparel
industry, such people with full of the energy in Japan are striving for
making clothes in quest of the place of activity still more. We perform
making the \"place\" where such people construct a networks and can take
various communications through the knowledge and the work. In the
Future, We will connect all people who in connection with clothes. For
example, you make clothes of \'I\' size, designing with American and
making pattern of clothes with Italian, using japanese textile which
Indians yarned and dyed, sewing or knitting by your partner in your
country who you found in \"Open-Clothes.com\"

Project History: When we, core members, were university students, we
studied about fashion industry, and make and sell clothes by ourselves.
But it was difficult to circulate making and selling our works.
Furthermore, we felt sorry for being unable to meet expectations of
friends \"Please make my clothes\". From the reflection, we worries
earnestly about \"the good relation\" between clothes and the Internet,
at last. We heard the episode that the man with six fingers said \"My
life is happy if it removes that there is no glove fits me.\" We thought
it should be that there is the glove fits him too, and that everybody
can get favorite and suited things. What it did not realize was the
negligence of those who were engaged in the fashion industry. Then the
project started in March, 2000 with 4 friends. The community site
started in May, 2001. We managed the community as we bring up our baby.
The community expanded little by little, by word of mouth. From early
time, we also started real meetings where members of the community can
meet and communicate each other. We have held about 30 events, such as
exchange meetings, study meetings, factory inspection meetings, the
exhibitions of clothes, and so on. Moreover, we started Open-Clothes
Expo as compilation of our vision last year. The Expo is held two times
a year.

People: 4 core staffs and about 40 volunteers carry the project. The
project team takes very open style. Everybody who is interested in the
project, can perticipate in it and taste feeling of fullness and
contribution. About 4,500 people are the members of the community where
everybody can perticipate for free with no regulation. About 50
companies and schools support the community.

Lessons learned: \* WORKED (not perfectly) - Human network community -
Knowledge database - Indivisual empowerment - Digital archive of works -
Common production / circulation / selling system - Matching of a hobby
and taste \* NOT WORKED - Tools for design - e-learning - Protection of
designs and copyrights - 3-dimensional measurement of a human body -
3-dimensional modeling / pattern making - Wearable computing -
Old-clothes recycling system - Low energy production - Realization of
the quality of life

Technical Information

Technological Basis: Web based tools as infrastructure. Tools and
platform for communication, design, presentation, business, knowledge
and fashion life itself.

Solutions: N/A

Implementations: N/A

Users: Everybody can watch the site \[ about 400,000 people accessed
since 2001/3 \]. More function for submitted Users \[ 4,500 users till
now \] for free. From 5 to 10 persons a day submit as users. Composition
of submitted members. - The level of 10 years old (30%), 20 (30%), 30
(15%), 40(10%), 50 (10%), over 60 (5%). - Students (30%), professionals
(40%), housewives (20%), other (10%). - Japan (Tokyo 70%, other 25%),
Other (5%). The number of beneficiaries will be up to \"6-billions\",
every people all over the world.

License: N/A

Statement of Reasons: We offer new way of community and society and
industry in fashion. Although limited field, there is the various life
activity itself. The members do not only gather and speak, but produce
values. They Co-municate, Co-design, Co-laborate, Co-product to make
clothes they want. That is to say, \"Open-Clothes\" is new community
mixing virtual and real, and producing values.

Planned use of prize money: We want to start new service to bring up
young designers which connect to industries. The service was very
difficult to start because of lack of money. We think once the service
started, the energy of young people drive not only \"Open-Clothes\"
community but also japanese industry itself to a good direction.

## Annex B -- List of Figures

Figure 1 -- Conceptual map for 'digital community'. Bird's eye

Figure 2 -- Co-occurrence pattern for the 'online community'

Figure 3 -- Logical intersections between 'online community', 'network',
'group'

Figure 4 -- Conceptual map without word seeding. Bird's eye

Figure 5 -- Temporal trend for 'rural'

Figure 6 -- Temporal trend for 'software'

Figure 7 -- Co-occurrence between 'software' and 'free'/'open'/'social'

Figure 8 -- Temporal trend for 'information'

Figure 9 -- Co-occurrence map for 'information'

Figure 10 -- Co-occurrence map for 'city'

Figure 11 -- Temporal trend for 'work'

Figure 12 -- Co-occurrence map for 'work'

Figure 13 -- Co-occurrence list for 'work'

Figure 14 -- Temporal trend for 'art'

Figure 15-- Temporal trend for 'media'

Figure 16 -- Co-occurrence map and concept list for 'art'

Figure 17 -- Visualization of the Overmundo network of mediators

## Annex C -- List of Tables

### Table 1 - Resume: from epistemological assumptions to techniques of data collection and analysis

| ﻿Epistemological assumptions | Choice of the sample | Technique of data collection | Technique of data analysis |
| -----------------------------| ----------------------------- | ----------------------------- | ----------------------------- |
| Performative classification of digital communities (DC): DC definition is the result of clustering together objects said to be occurrences of the concept. Acknowledgement as distributed enuciative action | Objects of study are the projects participating in Ars Electronica’s competition. They are said and acknowledged as DCs by different social actors: the projects authors + Prix Ars Electronica’s International Advisory Board + independent jury | Submissions exported from online archive as txt file with ASCII codification | Quali-quantitative (for N cases) and qualitative (for n cases) analysis of submissions |
| Study of controversies 1) Meaning emerges from comparison and/or polemic structures. 2) Controversies and agency are made visible into accounts | 1) Prix Ars Electronica competition as a form of controversy, a situation where meaning emerges from comparison between different projects struggling to be defined as successful DC. 2) Use of archived submission forms as accounts: meaning emerges also from distance in time | Navigation of DCs’ websites | Profile analysis of websites | 

### Table 2 -- Ranked Concept List for 'digital community'

| Concept       | Absolute Count | Relative Count |
|---------------|----------------|----------------|
| community     | 3446           | 100%           |
| development   | 818            | 23.70%         |
| world         | 627            | 18.10%         |
| local         | 573            | 16.60%         |
| social        | 491            | 14.20%         |
| creating      | 490            | 14.20%         |
| members       | 466            | 13.50%         |
| support       | 441            | 12.70%         |
| digital       | 436            | 12.60%         |
| tool          | 435            | 12.60%         |
| cultural      | 370            | 10.70%         |
| training      | 333            | 9.60%          |
| sharing       | 331            | 9.60%          |
| resources     | 326            | 9.40%          |
| rural         | 288            | 8.30%          |
| collaborative | 283            | 8.20%          |
| education     | 279            | 8%             |
| build         | 267            | 7.70%          |
| help          | 258            | 7.40%          |
| learning      | 228            | 6.60%          |
| youth         | 219            | 6.30%          |
| global        | 198            | 5.70%          |
| organizations | 189            | 5.40%          |
| groups        | 183            | 5.30%          |
| international | 163            | 4.70%          |
| include       | 161            | 4.60%          |
| interest      | 160            | 4.60%          |
| model         | 159            | 4.60%          |
| environment   | 157            | 4.50%          |
| real          | 152            | 4.40%          |
| networks      | 149            | 4.30%          |

### Table 3 - Co-occurrence list for 'online community'

![](imgs/Table03.png)

### Table 4 - InfoRapid Search & Replace's results for A = DIGCOM&group&!network (Hypothesis A \< B) 

| Searched for     | DIGCOM&group&!network                                                               |                     |          |
|------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------|----------|
| In Files         | *.txt                                                                               |                     |          |
| In Directories + | C:\Documents and Settings\Anna\Desktop\Dissertation 3.3\dati txt TOTALE 920\English |                     |          |
| Search Options   | Pattern matching Match whole words Use internal converters                          |                     |          |
| Matches found    | 401                                                                                 | Files found / total | 62 / 742 |

### Table 5 - InfoRapid Search & Replace's results for B= DIGCOM&network&!group (Hypothesis A \< B) 

| Searched for     | DIGCOM&network&!group                                                               |                     |          |
|------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------|----------|
| In Files         | *.txt                                                                               |                     |          |
| In Directories + | C:\Documents and Settings\Anna\Desktop\Dissertation 3.3\dati txt TOTALE 920\English |                     |          |
| Search Options   | Pattern matching Match whole words Use internal converters                          |                     |          |
| Matches found    | 208                                                                                 | Files found / total | 33 / 742 |

### Table 6 - InfoRapid Search & Replace's results for C = group&network (Hypothesis C = 0) 

| Searched for     | group&network                                                                       |                     |           |
|------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------|-----------|
| In Files         | *.txt                                                                               |                     |           |
| In Directories + | C:\Documents and Settings\Anna\Desktop\Dissertation 3.3\dati txt TOTALE 920\English |                     |           |
| Search Options   | Pattern matching Match whole words Use internal converters                          |                     |           |
| Matches found    | 3117                                                                                | Files found / total | 301 / 742 |

### Table 7 - InfoRapid Search & Replace's results for C = group&network&DIGCOM (Hypothesis D = 0) 

| Searched for     | group&network&DIGCOM                                                                |                     |           |
|------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------|-----------|
| In Files         | *.txt                                                                               |                     |           |
| In Directories + | C:\Documents and Settings\Anna\Desktop\Dissertation 3.3\dati txt TOTALE 920\English |                     |           |
| Search Options   | Pattern matching Match whole words Use internal converters                          |                     |           |
| Matches found    | 2144                                                                                | Files found / total | 157 / 742 |

### Table 8 - Leximancer settings for Task 2

| Leximancer settings                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Setting                                                                      | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | Value                                                                                                    | Explanation                                                                                                                                                              |
| Pre-processing Phase                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Stop-word removal (yes/no)                                                   | Remove words in the predefined Stop List from the data                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | yes                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Edit stop-word list                                                          | It allows to check the words that were counted as stop-words and remove them from the Stop List                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | no additional changes in the stop-word list                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Make folder tags (do nothing/make folder tags/make folder and filename tags) | This parameter is very important when comparing different documents based on their conceptual content. It causes each part of the folder path to a file, and optionally the filename itself, to be inserted as a tag on each sentence in the file. These tags will be included as concepts in the map. Thus, inspecting the links formed with the other concepts can allow the comparison of the content of the various folders | make folder tags (folders named as year of submission from 2004 to 2007)                                 | Since the task is about comparing the textual documents by the year of submission, this selection allows the generation of year-related tags that will appear in the map |
|                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Automatic Concept Identification                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Automatically Identify Concepts (yes/no)                                     | Enable/disable the automatic generation of concepts. By disabling this option, only concepts defined by the researcher will be shown on the map                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | yes                                                                                                      | This selection enables the automatic generation of concepts on the basis of frequency. This setting allows the researcher not to set any pre-defined concept in advance  |
| Total concept number (automatic/1-1000)                                      | The number of automatically selected concepts to be included in the map                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | automatic                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Number of names (automatic/1-1000)                                           | Of the number of concepts chosen, what is the minimum number of concepts that should be forced to be names                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | automatic                                                                                                | ‘Automatic’ allows a natural mixture by not forcing names into the list                                                                                                  |
|                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Concept Editing                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| TAB Auto Concepts                                                            | It allows to delete, merge and edit automatically extracted concepts                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | - Merge all plurals and derived morphological forms                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| TAB Auto Tags                                                                | It allows to delete, merge and edit folder tags                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | year-related tags                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| TAB User Defined Concepts                                                    | It allows to create, delete, merge and edit manually defined concepts                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | none                                                                                                     | I do not set concepts in advance                                                                                                                                         |
| TAB User defined tags                                                        | It allows to delete, merge and edit user defined tags                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | none                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                          |
|                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Thesaurus Learning                                                           |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Learn Concept Thesaurus (yes/no)                                             | Turning off the thesaurus learning will prevent Leximancer from adding additional items to the concept definitions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | yes                                                                                                      | Vast data se: need not only for simple keyword search, but also weighted accumulation of evidence                                                                        |
| Learning Threshold (1-21)                                                    | This setting allows to control the generality of each learned concept. Increasing the level will increase the fuzziness of each concept definition by increasing the number of words that will be included in each concept                                                                                                                                                                                                      | 14 (normal)                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Sentences per Context Block (1-5)                                            | This option allows to specify the sentences that appear in each learning block                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | 3                                                                                                        | value for most circumstances                                                                                                                                             |
| Break at paragraph (ignore/break at paragraph)                               | This setting is to prevent context blocks from crossing paragraph boundaries                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | yes                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Learn Tag Classes (yes/no)                                                   | Turning it on will treat Tag classes as normal concepts, learning a thesaurus definition for each                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | no                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Concept Profiling                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Number to discover (0 -1000)                                                 | It indicates how many extra concepts should be discovered                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | 0 (feature disabled)                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Themed discovery (Concepts in ALL/ ANY/ EACH)                                | It selects how the discovered concepts should be related to the pre-defined concept set                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          |
|                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Classification and Indexing                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Entities                                                                     | Entities are the concepts that are actually shown on the conceptual map, and represent the top-level of classification of the text                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | Concepts Tag classes                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Properties                                                                   | Properties, in contrast to entities, are concepts that are checked for co-occurrence with the entities, but are not displayed on the cluster map                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Kill classes                                                                 | Kill classes are concepts that if found in a classified block of text, cause all other classifications of that block to be suppressed                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Required classes                                                             | Required classes are classifications that must be found in blocks of text, or else the blocks are ignored                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Classification Settings                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Sentences per context block (1 – 100)                                        | Specify how many sentences per tagged text block                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | 3 (default)                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Break at paragraph (yes/no)                                                  | Prevent tagged context blocks from crossing paragraph boundaries                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | yes                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Word Classification Threshold (0.1-4.9)                                      | This threshold specifies how much cumulative evidence per sentence is needed for a classification to be assigned to a context block                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | 2.4 (default)                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Name Classification Threshold (2.6-5)                                        | This threshold specifies the minimum strength of the maximally weighted piece of evidence to trigger classification                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | 4.5 (default)                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Blocks per Bucket (1-100)                                                    | A bucket contains one or more consecutive context blocks. If the sum of the evidence of a particular concept within the bucket is below a threshold, the specific concept tag is removed from all the sentences in the bucket                                                                                                                                                                                                   | 1                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                          |
|                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Mapping and Statistic                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Conceptual Map                                                               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Map Type (Linear/Gaussian)                                                   | The Gaussian map has a more circular symmetry and emphasises the similarity between the conceptual context in which the words appear. The linear map is more spread out, emphasising the co-occurrence between items                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Linear                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Concept Statistics                                                           |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Attribute Variables                                                          | It allows to set attribute variables from the Concept List                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | ‘art’, ‘city’, ‘government’, ‘group’, ‘local’, ‘mobile’, ‘network’, ‘open’, ‘political’, ‘public’, ‘web’ |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Category Variables                                                           | It allows to set category variables from the Concept List                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | TG_2004_TG TG_2005_TG TG_2006_TG TG_2007_TG                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                          |

### Table 9 - Ranked Concept List for the whole data set without word seed

| Concept       | Absolute Count | Relative Count |
|---------------|----------------|----------------|
| site          | 720            | 22.30%         |
| art           | 608            | 18.80%         |
| work          | 537            | 16.60%         |
| information   | 457            | 14.10%         |
| software      | 451            | 13.90%         |
| media         | 375            | 11.60%         |
| development   | 298            | 9.20%          |
| local         | 277            | 8.50%          |
| system        | 259            | 8%             |
| mobile        | 237            | 7.30%          |
| cultural      | 235            | 7.20%          |
| social        | 226            | 7%             |
| open          | 218            | 6.70%          |
| technology    | 211            | 6.50%          |
| world         | 189            | 5.80%          |
| online        | 187            | 5.80%          |
| video         | 173            | 5.30%          |
| members       | 172            | 5.30%          |
| network       | 149            | 4.60%          |
| org           | 144            | 4.40%          |
| group         | 133            | 4.10%          |
| free          | 133            | 4.10%          |
| digital       | 127            | 3.90%          |
| money         | 125            | 3.80%          |
| services      | 114            | 3.50%          |
| public        | 114            | 3.50%          |
| students      | 102            | 3.10%          |
| support       | 101            | 3.10%          |
| research      | 96             | 2.90%          |
| rural         | 95             | 2.90%          |
| web           | 95             | 2.90%          |
| health        | 92             | 2.80%          |
| learned       | 87             | 2.60%          |
| time          | 80             | 2.40%          |
| radio         | 76             | 2.30%          |
| political     | 72             | 2.20%          |
| program       | 71             | 2.20%          |
| space         | 68             | 2.10%          |
| music         | 64             | 1.90%          |
| design        | 63             | 1.90%          |
| government    | 63             | 1.90%          |
| city          | 62             | 1.90%          |
| youth         | 62             | 1.90%          |
| including     | 61             | 1.80%          |
| school        | 43             | 1.30%          |
| countries     | 43             | 1.30%          |
| team          | 42             | 1.30%          |
| server        | 39             | 1.20%          |
| text          | 33             | 1%             |
| internet      | 32             | 0.90%          |
| human         | 31             | 0.90%          |
| global        | 30             | 0.90%          |
| international | 27             | 0.80%          |
| created       | 25             | 0.70%          |
| life          | 21             | 0.60%          |
| map           | 15             | 0.40%          |
| database      | 14             | 0.40%          |
| collaboration | 14             | 0.40%          |
| concept       | 13             | 0.40%          |
| collective    | 10             | 0.30%          |
| environment   | 10             | 0.30%          |

### Table 10 - Analysis sheet 

| Descriptive categories                  | Operative questions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Index                              |
|-----------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
| Project objective(s)                    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | A                                  |
| Goals                                   | What is the goal(s) that the project aims at achieving?                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | A1                                 |
| Source of boundaries                    | To what element does the application appeal in order to depict the community as a stable, taken for granted assemblage?                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | A2                                 |
| Actors involved                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | B                                  |
| Addresser                               | Is there any entity that designed/developed the project?                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | B1                                 |
| Addressee                               | Is there any identifiable target of the action of the Addresser? Are Addresser and Addressee clearly distinguishable?                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | B2a  B2b                           |
| Anti-groups/anti-actants                | Are there anti-actants that interfere with the course of action in a negative way?                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | B3                                 |
| Actants as mediators Vs. intermediaries | Is there any entity that contributes with some competences to the course of action? Does the actant trigger further actions/mediations? Does it activate new participants? Does it introduce a bifurcation in the course of action? Does it ‘transport’ (shift) or ‘translate’ (modify) what it is supposed to carry? Is the output predictable starting from the input? Does the actant determines some other event? How long is the chain of action? How many passages can be counted? | B4  B4a B4b  B4c  B4d  B4e B4f B4g |
| Professional mobilized                  | Are there professionals (journalists, social scientists, statisticians) quoted as part of what makes possible the durable definition of the community?                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | B5                                 |
| Spokesperson                            | Do the spokespersons that speak for the group existence – namely, the author of the application – appear as agents in the account?                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | B6                                 |

### Table 11 - Proyecto Cyberela -- Radio Telecentros. Variations in the role of radio, ICT and gender concerns following the advent of digital media

| ﻿                                   | Before the advent of the digital domain | With advent of the digital domain |
|------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| Radio                              | (Analogue)                              | (Internet radio)                  |
|                                    | Mediator                                | Mediator                          |
| ICT                                | (correspond to analogue radio)          | (Seen as ‘skills’)                |
|                                    |                                         | Goal to be reached                |
| Gender and human rights commitment | (Attention)                             | (Becomes ‘Contents’)              |
|                                    | Result of policies                      | Intermediary                      |

### Table 12 - Summary of the theories of action associated with 'empowerment'

| | Tonga.On-line | Akshaya  | Proyecto Cyberela – Radio Tel.| The World Starts with Me | canal*ACCESSI-BLE   | 
|-----------|----------- |----------- |----------- |----------- |----------- | 
| Source of boundaries            | Cultural heritage and traditions (Tonga people)                                                             | Geopolitical/administrative (local communities in Kerala)                                          | Statistics (gender)                                          | Statistic (age and, partially, gender)                                                      | Social discrimination                                                     |                                                     |
| Role of digital ICT              | Mediators (Alpha Smart triggers ‘msg and digital reflections’ creating associations with dispersed actants) | ICT-skills and data repository as goals. Wireless net, computers, scanners, etc. as intermediaries | ICT-skills are goals. Technical facilities as intermediaries | PC as intermediary (may be substituted). But ICT-skills as a competence. WSWM is a mediator | Mobile phones and digital photos as intermedi-aries; Internet alternatively as mediator or intermediary                      
| Role of other tech-nologies      | Music as mediator that translates the cultural heritage into the digital age                                | /                                                                                                  | Radio as mediator                                            | Low-tech objects (i.e. paper&pencil, local materials) as intermediaries                     | Broadcast media as (anti-) mediators                                      |                                                     |
| Mediators/intermediaries         | Many mediators, agency chain extends in many directions                                                     | One mediator, some intermedi-aries. Very short agency chain                                        | Few human mediators, some non-human intermediaries           | Many mediators                                                                              | Three mediators, some intermediaries                                      |                                                     |
| Professionals                    | Journalist                                                                                                  | /                                                                                                  | /                                                            | Teachers                                                                                    | /                                                                         |                                                     |
| Relationship Addresser/Addressee | No distinction                                                                                              | Clearly distinct (Service delivery business)                                                       | Fairly distinct after the advent of digital media            | Only during course: stu-dents who finish it become facilitators                             | Fairly distinct: ‘disadvantaged groups’ and project promoters do not blur |


### Table 13 - Comparison among EFF, FSF, Telestreet/NGV

| ﻿                     | EFF                                                                                                                                                                       | FSF                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | Telestreet                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|----------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Objective            | ‘To defend freedom of expression, innovation and privacy on the electronic frontier’                                                                                      | ‘To achieve sw freedom to cooperate for everyone’                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | To create relational networks and active citizenship through an integrated use of communication tools                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| Object of value      | Public interest in digital rights on a global level                                                                                                                       | Computer users rights to use, copy, study, modify and redistribute computer programs                                                                                                                                                                                          | Citizens right to access communication channels                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| Source of boundaries | Freedom in the networked world                                                                                                                                            | Community and cooperation (software freedom is a condition for this)                                                                                                                                                                                                          | Active citizenship (Freedom of expression is a condition for this)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Addresser            | Different levels of participation: EFF staff (coordinators, activists, techies, artists, policy analysts, attorneys), EFF members, nl subscribers, users of Action Center | Richard Stallman made it start. Then it proliferated through users and developers (see mediators)                                                                                                                                                                             | Orfeo TV started it, but everyone can set up a street TV. Participation is open and the aim is to overcome the distinction between sender and receiver                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Addressee            | ‘Those who create and communicate in the electronic world’, those who are interested in technology policy covering freedom                                                | see mediators (none is only addressee)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | see mediators (none is only addressee)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Anti-groups          | United States Secret Service                                                                                                                                              | Pressure for commercialization. Proprietary software                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | Two mainstream broadcasting networks                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Additional mediators | ‘Action alerts’, encourage personal political involvement. EFF as supporter and enabler of global digital community.                                                      | GNU OS gives computer users the freedom to cooperate. FSF itself raises funds for GNU, promotes users freedom, is trusted copyright holder. Volunteer developers from around the world. Kernel Linux (‘inspired by the community that we built’). Licenses guarantee freedom. | Telestreet induces non-professional people to experiment. Users are mediators. Article 21 of Italian Constitution invoked to assert Telestreet constitutionality, deputies mobilized.Media when combined or disassembled: Internet + DIY TV stimulates creativity, gives chance to become active, enables people, bridges gender and age divide. DIY ethics |
| Inter-mediaries      | website, blog posts, podcasts, online video projects, newsletter, online guides. YouTube, MySpace, social network sites                                                   | /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | Media when taken as single channels (satellite Tv, website)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |


### Table 14 - Classification of winning projects according to orientation to business, relationship between online and offline interaction, focus of interest, centralized/distributed technology used

|                                       | Profit/Non-profit | Only online/Also offline interaction | Specific focus of interest | Centralized/decentralized technology [^12annexes_1]|
|---------------------------------------|-------------------|--------------------------------------|----------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| Tonga.Online â smart X tension        | Non-profit        | Also offline                         | No                         | Centralized                          |
| Akshaya                               | Profit            | Also offline                         | No                         | Centralized                          |
| Projecto Cyberela â Radio Telecentros | Non-profit        | Also offline                         | Yes                        | Centralized                          |
| The World Starts With Me              | Non-profit        | Also offline                         | Yes                        | Centralized                          |
| canal*ACCESSIBLE                      | Non-profit        | Mainly online                        | No                         | Centralized                          |
| Electronic Frontier Foundation        | Non-profit        | Mainly online                        | Yes                        | Centralized                          |
| Free Software Foundation              | Non-profit        | Mainly online                        | Yes                        | Decentralized                        |
| Telestreet                            | Non-profit        | Also offline                         | No                         | Decentralized                        |
| Overmundo                             | Non-profit        | Mainly online                        | No                         | Centralized                          |
| Open Clothes                          | Profit            | Mainly online                        | Yes                        | Centralized                          |
| dotSUB                                | Profit            | Mainly online                        | Yes                        | Centralized                          |


### Table 15 - Analysis of the websites of the winning projects according to the degree of visibility of the Outside allowed by the technologies used

|                                                         | Technologies used                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | Interactive technologies that allow users to leave publicly visible traces                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Inscribed users                                                                            | Degree of visibility of the Outside                                  |
|---------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Akshaya www.akshaya.net                                 | Textual web pages (read only); Guestbook form (does not work); ‘Contact us’ link: list of phone numbers; Restricted area: it is not possible to register online                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | None                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | 1. Passive, invisible guest                                                                | Invisible, no online registra-tion                                   |
| Proyecto Cyberela – Radio Telecentros www.cemina.org.br | Textual web pages (read only); Video streaming; PDF documents’ publishing; Radio streaming/download; Contact form                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | None                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | 1. Passive, invisible guest                                                                | Invisible, no online registra-tion                                   |
| The World Starts With Me www.theworldstarts.org         | Flash animations accessible only to students and teachers; Contact e-mail addresses; Students forum                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Students forum accessible only by registered students. Online registration is not allowed                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | 1. Members interacting with each other                                                     | Invisible, no online registra-tion                                   |
| Tonga.Online – smart X tension www.mulonga.net          | Textual web pages (read only); News feed; Discussion forum; Contact form; Newsletter; A/V streaming and download                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Discussion forum: read-only for guests, submission-open for members. Online registration is allowed                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | 1. Members interacting with each other; 2. Passive, invisible guest                        | Invisible, but low barriers to member-ship                           |
| dotSUB dotsub.com                                       | Video screening is open; To upload one’s own videos and subtitle other people’s videos registration is required                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | Video uploading and subtitling is restricted to members. But online registration is allowed                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | 1. Members as experts; 2. Passive, invisible guest                                         | Invisible, but low barriers to member-ship                           |
| Canal*ACCESSIBLE www.zexe.net/barcelona                 | Photo, map and video database searchable by date, name of submitter, city area, type of obstacle; Open discussion forum                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | Open discussion forum: it does not need registration                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | 1. Interactivevisible guest                                                                | Visible                                                              |
| Electronic Frontier Foundation www.eff.org              | Contact e-mail addresses.; Newsletter; RSS Feeds; ‘Send a postcard’ form; ‘Send your message to decision makers’ form: restricted to U.S. citizens; HTML/PDF guides for Internet users; ‘Line Noise’ Podcast; ‘Submit prior Art’ form; EFF software projects: wikis, mailing lists and Sourceforge’s tracker; ‘Deeplinks’ blog: no comment facilities                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | EFF software projects make use of wikis for coordination, mailing lists and Sourceforge’s tracker for development                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | 1. Passive, invisible Other 2. Engaged citizens 3. Developers                              | Invisible                                                            |
| Free Software Foundation www.fsf.org www.gnu.org        | Newsletter; News section (read only); Mailing lists on specific campaigns; ‘Contact us’ e-mail address; Free Software Directory (db on all existing free sw): users can download and rate sw, submit a level, subscribe to development-focused mailing lists and IRC channels, view VCS repository; Campaigns center: information on campaigns and access to ‘take action’ tools hosted by partner organization like EFF’s action alert; FSF Groups Wiki; FSF Blogs publishes blog entries by ‘people in the community’, no comments allowed, but it possible to suggest one’s own blog; Events section: RSS feed; Code contribution: open to members | Mailing lists on specific campaigns restricted to members, but registration is allowed online; Mailing lists of code development open also to non-members; Free Software Directory: non-members can rate sw, subscribe to development-focused mailing lists and IRC channels; FSF Groups Wiki open to guests too; Code contribution: open to members, but online registration is allowed on Savannah servers | 1. Passive, invisible Other 2. Engaged citizens 3. Guest developers 4. Member develop-pers | Guest develop-pers are visible                                       |
| Telestreet www.telestreet.it www.ngvision.org           | News section run by editorial team, guests’ comments allowed; Open a posteriori moderated mailing list (Telestreet); Closed mailing list (NGV); Discussion forum; Video download; Peer-to-peer video distribution; Ftp upload of videos                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | Open comments on news; Open mailing list; Discussion forum (need registration which is allowed online); Peer-to-peer distribution and ftp upload open to guests                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | 1. Interactivevisible Other 2. Low barriers member-ship                                    | Visible                                                              |
| Overmundo www.overmundo.com.br                          | Blog: open to read, only members can comment, submit, revise, vote articles; Contact form to contact the core team                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Blog: only members can comment, propose, revise and vote articles to be published. Online registration is allowed BUT requires sensitive data. Members have different voting weights according to the length of their participation in the community                                                                                                                                                         | 1. Invisible Other 2. Entry members 3. Established members 4. Senior members               | Invisible, barriers to member-ship posed by time, commit-ment and ID |
| Open Clothes www.open-clothes.com                       | Read-only news section; Bulletin board; ‘Recipe’ download; Database on members (‘Harbour’); B2B and B2C selling platform; Members showcase (‘Dejima’); Newsmagazine; Database of fashion schools; ‘Production journal’ showcase                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | Bulletin board: posting requires membership; B2B and B2C selling platform: access requires membership; Members showcase requires membership; Newsmagazine open to contributions by members                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | 1./2./3./4Diverse forms of member-ship                                                     | Invisible, barriers to member-ship posed by time, commit-ment and ID |


### Table 16 - Map of communities according to degree of permeability entailed by self accounts (rows) and software (columns)

| Application/Software               | Invisible Other                                                            | High barriers to membership | Low barriers to membership   | Visible Other                       |
|------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|------------------------------|-------------------------------------|
| More mediators than intermediaries | The World Starts With Me                                                   | Overmundo                   | Tonga.Online-smart X tension | Free Software Foundation Telestreet |
| More intermediaries than mediators | Akshaya Proyecto Cyberela-Radio Telecentros Electronic Frontier Foundation | Open Clothes                | dotSUB                       | Canal*ACCESSIBLE                    |

##

[^12annexes_1]: With 'centralized' we consider those technologies that allow a
    few-to-many or one-to-many pattern of communication through a unique
    platform. Examples are web-radios, blogs, html web pages. With
    'decentralized' technologies we mean those tools that allow a
    many-to-many or one-to-one pattern of communication. Examples are
    peer-to-peer networks, mailing lists, wikis. We certainly
    acknowledge that this is a very rough distinction: for instance,
    wikis are a many-to-many technology, but they also rely upon a web
    platform, so that there is a certain degree of centralization in
    wikis, too. As it is going to be explained in the following lines,
    we quote this and the other variables just to go beyond them and
    replace them with more abstract principles.
